Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26014
Absolute frequency readout derived from ULE
cavity for next generation geodesy missions
EMILY ROSE REES ,1,2,*
 ANDREW R. W ADE ,1,2
 ANDREW J.
SUTTON ,1,2
 ROBERT E. S PERO ,3 DANIEL A. S HADDOCK ,1,2 AND
KIRK MCKENZIE 1,2
1Centre for Gravitational Astrophysics (CGA), Research School of Physics, The Australian National
University, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia
2 ARC Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery (OzGrav), Research School of Physics, The
Australian National University, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia
3Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive Pasadena, CA
91109, USA
*emilyrose.rees@anu.edu.au
Abstract: The next generation of Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE)-like
dual-satellite geodesy missions proposals will rely on inter-spacecraft laser interferometry as the
primaryinstrumenttorecovergeodesysignals. Laserfrequencystabilityisoneofthemainlimits
of this measurement and is important at two distinct timescales: short timescales over 10-1000
seconds to measure the local gravity below the satellites, and at the month to year timescales,
where the subsequent gravity measurements are compared to indicate loss or gain of mass (or
water and ice) over that period. This paper demonstrates a simple phase modulation scheme
to directly measure laser frequency change over long timescales by comparing an on-board
Ultra-Stable Oscillator (USO) clocked frequency reference to the Free Spectral Range (FSR) of
the on-board optical cavity. By recording the fractional frequency variations the scale correction
factor may be computed for a laser locked to a known longitudinal mode of the optical cavity.
The experimental results demonstrate a fractional absolute laser frequency stability at the 10
ppb level (10−8) at time scales greater than 10 000 seconds, likely sufficient for next generation
mission requirements.
© 2021 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement
The Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) missions [1,2] tracklocalized changes
in Earth’s gravity field over months and years. These fluctuations in the local gravity field are
representative of mass transport processes, and are primarily driven by hydrological changes: the
accumulation and melting of ice, changes in ground water levels through seasonal variation and
extraordinary events such as drought. The importance of such data has led to significant interest
within the Earth Science community, ranking GRACE-like missions as one of the top priorities
[3]. Emphasis has been placed on the need for continuity of data and improvements to sensitivity
going forward. Future GRACE-like missions, including NASA’s Mass-Change mission study [4]
and the Next-Generation Gravity Mission [5], are in the planning phase but expected to launch in
the mid-2020’s to achieve continuity with GRACE Follow-On [2].
In GRACE-like missions, two identical satellites are placed into an approximately 500 km
altitude near-polar orbit (89°) with a separation of 220 km. Inter-spacecraft ranging is used to
precisely track the relative satellite separation at micrometer precision or better. When combined
with GPS location and on-board accelerometer measurements (to remove atmospheric drag), the
gravitational variations on the Earth can be inferred with spatial resolution of about 300 km.
Global maps of Earth’s gravitational changes are published monthly, revealing the motion of
water on the Earth due to local, seasonal and climatic changes over years and decades. GRACE
(2002) and GRACE Follow-On (GRACE-FO, 2018) used K/Ka-Band microwave ranging for
#434483 https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.434483
Journal © 2021 Received 18 Jun 2021; revised 12 Jul 2021; accepted 12 Jul 2021; published 28 Jul 2021

Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26015
their primary science, however GRACE-FO included a Laser Ranging Interferometer (LRI)
technologydemonstration[6]. TheGRACE-FOLRImetallofthetechnologygoalsandhasbeen
producing scientific quality data for the mission. Recent work shows that the higher precision
and lower noise of the LRI system can reveal new insights [7] and this trend is expected to
continue. At a sensitivity noise floor of approximately 10nm/
√
Hz [6], it resolved range some
two orders of magnitude better than the primary Microwave Instrument equivalent [2]. This
improved sensitivity makes a LRI the leading choice for primary instrument selection on next
generation gravity sensing missions.
To qualify a LRI as the prime and only inter-spacecraft ranging measurement for the next
mission, NASA’s Mass Change Study [4] identifies three areas requiring further work: increased
robustness to thruster activation, system redundancy, and development of a method to read out
the LRI Scale Correction or ‘scale factor’ to correct for long term drifts in laser frequency. Of
these three items, the latter is the only new technology item. Without a Microwave Instrument
on board, the LRI requires a new technique to mitigate the effect of laser frequency drift over
timescales of a month and longer. The final mission requirement for absolute knowledge of the
laser frequency is not decided but it is expected to demand fractional sensitivity on the order of
10 ppb (10−8) or better [4,8].
Thispaperprovidesadetailedinvestigationofa‘scale-factor’measurementtechniquedescribed
in the Mass Change study, first developed at NASA/JPL [4] based on an extension of a proposal
by Devoe and Brewer [9]. The scheme directly compares the frequency stability of an RF source,
such as an on-board Ultra-Stable Oscillator (USO), against the mode spacing (c/2L) of an optical
cavity. The experimental results demonstrate a fractional absolute laser frequency stability at
about 1 ppb (10−9), likely sufficient for next generations mission requirements.
The inclusion of such a technique in the next GRACE mission is predicated on two important
factors: a relatively simple implementation requiring only low risk changes to flight-heritage
LRI hardware, and that the addition of the scale-factor measurement does not compromise the
short-term laser frequency stability demonstrated by the LRI on orbit. This paper addresses both
factors, presenting a possible configuration for integration into the mission and a demonstration
of unaffected laser stability at the short timescales.
The paper is laid out as follows; in Section 1 the motivation for the scale-factor is introduced.
Sections 2 and 3 introduce the concept and a specific implementation that may be useful for
future space missions. Section 4 presents an experimental demonstration and results of this
concept using optical cavities and lasers.
1. Motivation for the scale-factor measurement
The GRACE-FO mission reports a scale-correction,ϵ(t), to correct for laser frequency change
over time [10], derived by comparing the microwave and laser ranging measurements. This scale
factor is of critical importance in calibrating measurements for monthly and yearly gravity maps,
where changes of laser frequency can be misinterpreted as a change in gravity. The sampled
phase of individual samples at the same ground position will include contributions from the
standing static gravity field as well as changes due to the movement of mass (mainly water). In
order to meet the mission requirements the LRI laser must remain within a certain fractional
frequency band in order for the residual month-to-month change signals to not be masked by the
static gravity signal being scaled into the measurement.
On the GRACE Follow-On mission, the scale factor for the LRI is calculated from the residual
difference between the microwave and laser range measurements. The microwave frequency is
derived from on-board Ultra-Stable Oscillators (USO), and is known with very high accuracy
(10−11 per day [11]). The laser frequency stability (<10−13) significantly exceeds that of the
USO over shorter timescales (10-1000 seconds [12]) by referencing and stabilizing its optical
frequencyagainstaresonantopticalmodewithinanUltra-LowExpansion(ULE)glasscavity. At
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26016
longer timescales the cavity length systematically drifts, influenced by the spacecraft temperature
and aging of the glass, which results in a corresponding drift of laser absolute frequency. The
time-varying laser frequency,ν, can be related to the initial laser frequency,ν0 = 2.8 ×1014[Hz],
by the scale-factorν = (1 + ϵ(t))ν0.
Such an un-calibrated, slow change in the laser frequency degrades the subtraction of the large
static gravity signal,S(f ), from the science data when two time separated measurements are
subtracted, as given by the following equation:
∆LScaling Noise = S(f ) νσ(τ)
ν0
. (1)
Hereonecanwritethelaserabsolutefrequencyasameanvalueplussomestatisticalvariationat
measurementtimeseparation τ, νi = ν0 + νσ(τ). Figure1showsthenominalrangemeasurement,
represented as a range spectral density, extracted from the GRACE Follow-On LRI on-orbit data,
along with the laser frequency displacement noise requirement. The blue curve shows that the
residual coupling of the static gravitational field for a scale-factor errorϵ = 10−8. At this level
the coupling of static signal induced by a scale-factor error is smaller than the LRI instrument
requirement, except at the once- and twice-per-orbit tone frequencies (0.18mHz and 0.36mHz).
This error is likely sufficient for the next GRACE-like mission and, thus, for this article we
estimate the scale factor accuracy requirement to beϵ = 10−8. We define the requirement in
terms of fractional laser frequency change as an Allan Deviation over the time scale 10 000
seconds and above as
νσ(τ)
ν0
= 10−8, for τ>10 000 seconds. (2)
Fig. 1. The static gravity field amplitude spectral density measured by the LRI from Abich
et al. [6] (red trace). The laser frequency noise requirement for GRACE Follow-On was
30 nm/
√
Hz ×NSF(f) (yellow solid trace). The scale factor correction produced by the
GRACE-FO mission is on the order of 1.2e-7 [13] and derived by comparing the stabilised
microwave system to the laser. The required error in the scale factor for the next GRACE
mission is expected to be less than 10−8, with the corresponding residual range error shown
by the blue trace.
2. Scale factor measurement system for the next GRACE mission
To directly readout the scale factor in a future laser-only ranging instrument, it is necessary to
develop a technique that can tie the absolute frequency of the laser light to an external reference,
such as an iodine absorption line [4] or a USO [5]. With a view to minimizing changes to the
LRI flight-heritage (NASA TRL9) hardware, such an approach should leverage existing LRI
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26017
resources wherever possible. We demonstrate a concept to sample the frequency spacing of the
optical reference cavity with existing resources; a single laser, a single phase modulator and a
single Megahertz bandwidth photoreceiver. The concept relies upon the fixed relationship of
the laser’s absolute frequency,νLaser, with the cavity longitudinal mode spacing,νFSR, when the
laser is locked onto a specific resonant mode.
The scheme applies an optical phase modulation to infer the laser frequency change (or
scale-factor) over long timescales by directly comparing the frequency stability of a reference
oscillator to the Free Spectral Range (FSR) of an on-board optical cavity. In addition to a
conventional PDH lock of the laser to a cavity resonant mode [14], the technique multiplies up
an Ultra-Stable reference Oscillator (USO) signal from≈38.66 MHz to coincide with the LRI
flight cavity’s FSR of≈ 1.94 GHz and modulates this signal onto the phase of the light incident
on the optical cavity. The modulation signal generates frequency-shifted optical sidebands which
interactwiththeadjacentcavityresonantmodes. Readoutofanyfrequencydifferencebetweenthe
actualcavityFSRandthegeneratedGigahertzsidebandsusesalock-inmodulation-demodulation
technique at a few Megahertz to give a PDH-like detuning readout, all using only a Megahertz
bandwidth photodetector.
Lockingthelasertoacavityresonancesetsthelaserfrequencytobeanintegermultiple( nmode)
ofthecavitylongitudinalmodespacingfrequency,theFree-SpectralRange(FSR) νFSR = c/2L ≈
1.94 GHz, whereL is the absolute cavity length andc the speed of light in vacuum. Accordingly,
the laser’s optical frequency and FSR are related by the mode numbernmode ≡ νLaser/FSR.
Feedback locking then ensures that changes in cavity lengthδL are proportionally replicated in
both laser frequency and cavity FSR,δL/L = δνLaser/νLaser = δνFSR/νFSR.
Calibrationofthemodenumber nmode priortolaunchallowsconversionoffractionalfrequency
changesofthecavityFSRintoarealtimeabsolutefrequencychangeby νLaser = nmode × νFSR [Hz].
Thus, with a minimum number of components, the proposed RF measurement of the cavity
FSR is able to infer the scale factor using only local measurements on-board a single satellite,
with measurement of the on-board USO’s frequency drift calculated after data down-link by
referencing GPS time measurements.
Figure 2 shows the current PDH laser locking scheme implemented on the GRACE Follow-On
LRI, with the addition of the proposed Scale Factor Unit (SFU) electronics/hardware and
associated FSR Firmware block diagram components. On the GRACE Follow-On LRI, the
PDH locking scheme running on the Laser Ranging Processor (LRP) [12] directly drives a 1.5
MHz modulation into the phase modulator and uses a digital demodulation of the reflected
photodetector signal from a cavity to derive a feedback signal [15][16].
The proposed SFU generates and adds a second modulation tone onto the LRP PDH signal
priortothePhaseModulator. ThetonefrequencyisconfiguredbytheOBCtomatchtheestimated
FSR frequency (ΥFSR ≈ νFSR [Hz]). A Megahertz phase modulation of the Gigahertz FSR
tone provides a lock-in error signal sensitive to the difference between the actual and estimated
cavity FSR frequency, as compared against the USO. The proposed readout closely mirrors the
LRP’s digital PDH lock-in implementation, including use of a common photodetector-digitizer
chain, and allows for either closed- or open-loop correction of the FSR estimate from within
the LRP or via ground telemetry. Required modifications to legacy-LRI hardware include an
additional hardware-based frequency synthesizer to multiply the USO frequency up to the FSR
frequency(∼2 GHz), a Gigahertz bandwidth phase modulator in place of the current 150 MHz
bandwidth device, additional digital lock-in readout implemented in the firmware of the LRP,
and power, telemetry, and USO interfaces for the FSR readout electronics to interface with the
spacecraft.
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26018
Fig. 2. Showing a possible block diagram for the laser sub-system of a future MCM
mission, where scale-factor (SF) and PDH firmware are operated from a single FPGA.
The laser has two output ports; the first is routed to the Optical Bench Assembly (OBA)
which implements the inter-satellite interferometer link, while the second is routed to the
optical cavity for laser frequency stabilization. The scale-factor measurement requires a new
external unit, the Scale-Factor Unit (SFU), to implement the FSR Numerically Controlled
Oscillator (NCO) for generation of the scale-factor measurement’s Gigahertz tone (matched
to the cavity FSR) and analog summation with the LRP’s PDH modulation signal. The
FSR tone is phase modulated using a Quadrature Mixer (QM) by the output of a second
NCO, the Scale-Factor NCO (SF NCO), which generates a Megahertz modulation used to
sense changes in cavity FSR. The LRP’s FSR firmware implements lock-in detection at
the SF NCO’s phase modulation frequency (ΥSF) for readout of cavity FSR changes. The
dashed line linking the LRP FSR firmware with the SF NCO represents an optional phased
synchronization which may simplify lock-in detection. The configuration shown here is
an open-loop readout, whereby the changes in FSR are sent to ground as part of regular
telemetry data. This scheme permits regular/periodic updates to the estimated FSR by a
ground-to-satellite parameter upload, or an alternate software-based closed loop feedback
to the Scale Factor Unit’s FSR oscillator frequency via communication with the satellite
On-Board Computer (OBC).
3. Cavity FSR readout
This section presents a derivation of the lock-in Scale Factor readout scheme detailed in the
previous section. At a high level, the measurement relies upon generation of frequency-offset
sub-carriers to sense the frequency-spacing of optical cavity resonances above and below the
PDH resonant mode. Sub-carriers are generated by theFSR tone applied as phase modulation
priortothecavityatafrequencyapproximatingtheFSR ΥFSR ≈ νFSR ≈ 2 GHz. TheScaleFactor
readout senses the offset∆ ˆνFSR = ΥFSR − νFSR between the FSR sub-carriers and their associated
upper/lowerresonancesbyananglemodulationatauniqueMHz-scale‘SFtone’. Thisadditional
nested angle-modulation provided by the SF tone generates phase modulation side bands about
each FSR sub-carrier, butnot at the carrier frequency of the laser.
Detuning of the FSR sub-carriers relative to their respective cavity resonances results from a
change in cavity FSR and, accordingly, a change in Scale Factor. This change is measured via a
mechanism analogous to PDH, where interaction of the FSR sub-carrier with the cavity response
causesphaserotationofthesub-carrierrelativetothenon-resonantsidebandmodulation. Forthis
reason the SF tone frequency is selected to be greater than the cavity linewidth. The sub-carrier
phase rotation provides conversion of Phase to Amplitude modulation for subsequent lock-in
detection. Since the SF readout is referenced to the USO, uncontrolled changes in the FSR
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26019
modulation frequency due to USO drift will mimic scale factor changes, however correction is
readily available by tracking the absolute USO frequency against e.g. GPS timestamps as part of
regular mission function [10].
Practically, the LRP’s PDH output can be summed with the FSR waveform within the SFU
priortothecavity’sphasemodulator. Linearityofthephasemodulator(voltage)inputmeansthat
the waveform summation is equivalent to independent, series modulators drive by the respective
PDH and FSR waveforms, and eliminates the need for a second (new) modulator. Further, the SF
tonefrequency ΥSF isselectedas ΥSF ≠ ΥPDH todifferentiateitfromPDHmodulationfrequency.
The electric field of the light exiting the optical phase modulator is given by
E(t) = E0eiω0t eiα sin(2πΥPDHt)
⏞ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏟⏟ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏞
PDH
eiβ sin(2πΥFSRt+γ sin(2πΥSFt))
⏞ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏟⏟ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏞
Scale Factor
(3)
where E0 is the input field amplitude,ω0 is the laser carrier frequency,ΥPDH [Hz] is the PDH
frequency with associated modulation depthα [rad], ΥFSR [Hz] is the FSR tone modulation with
modulation depthβ [rad], andΥSF [Hz] is SF frequency of angle modulation applied to the FSR
tone waveform, with depthγ [rad]. To first order, the field can be expanded as:
E(t) = E0 eiω0t
{︄
J0(α)J0(β) + J0(β)J1(α)ei2πΥPDHt − J0(β)J1(α)e−i2πΥPDHt
⏞ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏟⏟ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏞
Carrier−PDH
+ J1(β)ei2πΥFSRt
(︂
J0(α)J0(γ) + J1(α)J0(γ)ei2πΥPDHt − J1(α)J0(γ)e−i2πΥPDHt
⏞ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏟⏟ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏞
Upper FSR−PDH
+ J0(α)J1(γ)ei2πΥSFt − J0(α)J1(γ)e−i2πΥSFt
⏞ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏟⏟ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏞
Upper FSR−SF
)︂
− J1(β)e−i2πΥFSRt
(︂
J0(α)J0(γ) + J1(α)J0(γ)ei2πΥPDHt − J1(α)J0(γ)e−i2πΥPDHt
⏞ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏟⏟ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏞
Lower FSR−PDH
− J0(α)J1(γ)ei2πΥSFt + J0(α)J1(γ)e−i2πΥSFt
⏞ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏟⏟ˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉˉ⏞
Lower FSR−SF
)︂}︄
,
(4)
where Jn(x) denotes then-th Bessel function of the first kind. Here we assume that PDH and
FSR modulation is small (typically<1 rad), and that higher order side bands may be ignored.
This is a reasonable assumption for the modulation depths that might be expected for mission.
The resulting output of the modulator is the convolution product of the two modulations
summed and injected into the phase modulator (PDH and SF). The modulation pattern is
illustrated in Fig. 3. A conventional phase modulation pattern for the PDH side bands is present
about both the laser fundamental frequency and FSR Gigahertz sub-carriers. Demodulation of
detected photo-current atΥPDH will produce an error signal proportional to the absolute laser
offset from the closest cavity fringe. Conversely, the scale factor readout side bands are only
present on the FSR sub-carriers and exhibit an odd symmetry with respect to the Gigahertz
products about the carrier frequency. This asymmetry inverts the demodulated lock-in signals
sampledatresonancesaboveandbelowthecarrier,makingthereadoutsensitivetothedifferential
effect of mode spacing change (scale factor) and insensitive to common optical carrier frequency
changes. Beat components from the resonances above and below the carrier frequency will sum
coherently and when demodulated atΥSF will form a single scale factor readout proportional to
∆ = ΥFSR − νFSR, with a mathematical form equivalent to that of a PDH error signal. This Scale
Factor error signal samples the difference in frequency between reference oscillator tone and the
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26020
true frequency of the cavity FSR spacing. Thus, with a laser stabilised to a known cavity fringe
and a readout of the mode spacing referenced against an external oscillator, a readout of absolute
frequency drift can be made. From this, fractional frequency changes of the laser’s absolute
frequency can be estimated and factored into the interferometrically derived ranging signals of a
GRACE-FO like instrument.
Fig. 3. Frequency-Phasor diagram of first order terms of optical modulator output. PDH
sidebandshaveanoffsetfrequencyof ΥPDHateachofthecarrierandsub-carriercomponents.
The external reference oscillator frequencyΥFSR sets the sub-carrier frequency and is set
closetothecavityfreespectralrange νFSR. Tothiselectronicswaveformananglemodulation
ΥSF applied to provide sidebands to readout Scale Factor (SF). An error signal is generated
by demodulating at both the PDH modulation frequency (for locking to a cavity fringe)
and at the scale factor modulation frequency to extract a readout out of∆ = ΥFSR − νFSR
(the change of cavity longitudinal mode spacing relative to our externally clocked reference
tone). The illustration shows a modeled error signal for the scale factor readout and a scaled
response of the scale factor response to carrier offset from cavity resonant fringe at the 100
Hz level.
4. Experimental verification of concept
The experimental layout used to verify this readout scheme is illustrated in Fig. 4. A single
laser (1064 nm NPRO, Innolight Prometheus) was stabilised to an optical reference cavity using
a conventional Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) feedback loop [14]. Here the optical cavity was a
moderate finesse (∼9400) traveling wave optical cavity with an FSR of 1.78 GHz and Full
Width Half Maximium (FWHM) of 190 kHz and demonstrated performance compatible with
GRACE-FO requirements [17]. This cavity was constructed from Ultra Low Expansion (ULE)
glass (spacer and mirrors), with a mean coefficient of thermal expansion of order 0± 30 ppb/°C
from 5−35 °C [18], and housed within a thermally isolated and controlled vacuum vessel. A
Liquid Instruments Moku:Lab provided a digital PDH controller for frequency feedback to the
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26021
NPRO PZT and Thermal frequency control actuators. A list of further experimental parameters
is provided in Table 1.
Fig. 4. Schematic of FSR readout experiment. An NPRO 1064 nm laser is locked to
a resonance of a traveling wave triangular cavity using conventional Pound-Drever-Hall
locking; a 1 MHz tone is used to generate phase modulation side bands that convert to
amplitude (AM) as the cavity drifts off resonance, this signal is sensed on reflection by a
Megahertz bandwidth photo detector and demodulated to generate an error signal that is
fed back to the laser to hold it on resonance. For the FSR readout, a 1.78 GHz signal is
angle modulated with a 2.1 MHz base band waveform, using a Quadrature Mixer (QM), to
generate a nested modulation with the sideband pattern illustrated in Fig. 3. As the cavity
free spectral range changes relative to the reference external Gigahertz carrier the upper
and lower Gigahertz sidebands each convert phase modulation at 2.1 MHz into AM that is
detected, digitised and demodulated within a FPGA signal processing chain. The result is an
error signal similar to the well known PDH error signal, however due to the odd symmetry
of the Gigahertz components around resonance it is, to first order, sensitive to changes in
mode spacing rather than absolute frequency. Thus we have a pair of error signals that
independently sense the absolute frequency of the laser relative to a resonance, and also the
spacing of modes relative to an external non-optical absolute reference.
Table 1. List of experimental parameters
Parameter Experimental Value
Cavity input power (P0) 700 µ W
Laser wavelength (approx.) 1064 nm
Cavity FSR (νFSR) 1.78 GHz
Cavity finesse (approx.) 9400
PDH sidebands (ΥPDH) 1.0 MHz
PDH sideband modulation depth (α) 0.04 rad
FSR carrier tone (ΥFSR) 1.78 GHz
FSR carrier modulation depth (β) 0.75 rad
Scale factor modulation tone (ΥSF) 2.1 MHz
Scale factor modulation depth (γ) 0.3 rad
Phasemodulationwasappliedusingasinglewide-bandwidth(10GHz)fibercoupledwaveguide
Lithium Niobate phase modulator (iXblue, NIR-MPX-LN-10), chosen for its low AM residuals,
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26022
high stability and low drive voltage requirements. TheΥSF ≈ 1.78 GHzFSR tone (matched to
the nominal cavity FSR), was generated using a Rhode & Schwartz SMB100B signal generator,
with an internal OCXO frequency reference. The FSR tone was directly phase modulated within
the signal generator with the sinusoidal SF tone of 0.3 rad applied atΥSF = 2.1 MHz. An RF
resistive combiner component (Mini-Circuits ZFRSC-42-S+) was used for waveform summation
for (∼MHz) PDH and (∼GHz) FSR electronic voltage waveforms.
Modulated light was mode matched into the optical cavity and the reflected field detected
on an InGaAs 150 MHz bandwidth fixed gain photodetector (Thorlabs PDA05CF2). A digital
lock-in amplifier running on a second Liquid Instruments Moku:Lab FPGA unit was used to
demodulate and log the Scale Factor measurement. This mixed the reflected photodetector signal
with a 2.1 MHz tone derived from the Gigahertz FSR signal generator, low pass filtered with a
10.1 Hz 18 dB/oct filter and digitally amplified by+90 dB gain before being logged to disk. A
calibration of the scale factor slope sensitivity around the zero crossing point (e.g. 0 Hz FSR
estimation error) was carried out by stepping the FSR tone by a series of 10 Hz offsets, resulting
in a calibration coefficient of 230 Hz/V which was used to scale the logged data [V] into input
referred FSR frequency detuning [Hz].
An example sweep of the SF readout signal was obtained by sweeping the FSR tone over a 6
MHzrangeaboutthenominalcavityFSR.TheresultingreadoutisshowninFig.5,demonstrating
the near linear sensitivity to FSR tone frequency error (recorded with+40 dB Gain). On orbit,
the FSR detuning is expected to have very small signal dynamics over mission lifetime of
δνFSR/νFSR ∼ 10−7 or δνFSR ∼ 200 Hz, as estimated from the published scale factor data for
GRACE-FO [13,19]. For this reason, data acquisition was performed with an optimized+90 dB
gain which provided a narrow-but-sufficient (unsaturated) measurement range of± 100 Hz within
the linear region around the true FSR.
Fig. 5. Example sweep of FSR readout signal as a function of external reference oscillator
frequency. Here gain of the lock-in amplifier was reduced to+40 dB (from+90 dB) to
allow us to see the full peak-to-peak of the error signal within the dynamic range of the
instrument. Reported ‘Volts’ are in equivalent units of the Moku:Lab input ADC. The
following measurements presented in this Section utilise only narrow± 100 Hz linear region
of the signal about the center zero crossing point. A slight asymmetry is observed in the
upperandlowersingle-sidebandcomponentsoftheerrorsignalsweepduetothemodulation
frequency being within an order of magnitude of the reference cavity linewidth.
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26023
TheFSRreadoutsignalwasrecordedforaperiodof30days,duringwhichtimeourlaboratory
remainedundisturbed. Theresultingcalibratedreadoutsignalofcavitymodespacingshowedthe
relative stability of the passive thermally isolated cavity against the frequency reference provided
by our signal generator. The full time series data for this 30 day period is given in Fig. 6. The
fractional frequency change during this time period did not exceed 10−8.
Fig. 6. Full time series data; 800 hours represents 33 days of unbroken data. The cavity
temperature was not actively controlled for this measurement. The fractional frequency
changeshowninthismeasurementdoesnotexceed ± 10 ppb. Thisdemonstratesperformance
an order of magnitude better than the current scale factor for GRACE-FO (10−7).
The Allan Deviation of the FSR readout data is shown in Fig. 7, achieving performance an
order of magnitude below the expected next mission requirement. For comparison, a PDH
readout with two lasers locked to a single cavity one FSR apart is also plotted, as is an external
clock measurement which shows the FSR readout is not limited by clock noise.
Toverifythefrequencystabilizationperformanceisnotimpactedbythescale-factorreadout,a
tap-offofthelaserwasinterferedwithasecond,independentlaserstabilisedtoasecondreference
optical cavity on a high-bandwidth photo-detector. The relative frequency of the two lasers was
trackedusingadigitalphasemeter(LiquidInstruments, Moku:Lab). Figure8showsthisbeatnote
measurement, taken simultaneously with an FSR readout measurement, is able to be maintained
below the GRACE-FO mission requirement curve.
Whilstthemeasuredchangesarecomparabletotheanticipatedon-orbitenvironment(fractional
changes ∼ 10−8),theabsenceofanexternalabsolutefrequencyreference(seeSection5.) requires
a dedicated test to verify the readout sensitivity to FSR (& scale factor) changes over other
potentially confounding factors, such as electronics noise and reference oscillator drift. To
accomplish this, a 5°C step/offset was added to the optical cavity’s thermal set-point of the
cavity’s thermal shield enclosure to induce change in cavity FSR via thermal expansion. The
correspondingchangeinFSRreadoutispresentedinFig.9,fromwhichanestimated ∼12ppb/ °C
fractional length change has occurred in the cavity (within the 0± 30 ppb/°C expected from the
ULE spacer material at 5-35°C [18]). Accurate measurement of the FSR change verifies the
method’s sensitivity to a scale-factor perturbation.
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26024
Fig. 7. Measured Allan deviation of frequency readout relative to stable Oven Controlled
Oscillator (OCOX) reference and PDH readout. The FSR readout is performing an order of
magnitude below the expected next mission requirement, and is not limited by clock noise.
Fig. 8. Frequency noise [Hz/√Hz] of the beatnote of two cavity stabilised lasers. The
two traces show the performance with (blue) and without (orange) the FSR readout (GHz
sidebands)enabled-showingtheprimary(PDH)laserstabilisationsystemmeetsperformance
requirements in either case. The frequency noise is calculated by taking the square root of
the Power Spectral Density (PSD), and is also referred to as the root psd or rpsd.
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26025
Fig. 9. Cavity Temperature step test. A temperature step of+5 °C was applied, and a
corresponding change in the readout equivalent to 12 ppb/°C of fractional length change of
the cavity is seen. This demonstrates that the readout responds to the changes in the optical
setup and is not just an artifact of reference oscillator drift or electronic readout drift. The
cavity beatnote was used as verification of the FSR readout, with much higher precision.
5. Discussion
5.1. Open-loop vs closed-loop operation
The results presented here show sufficient performance to meet expected mission requirements in
open-loop monitoring of FSR changes, as the estimated FSR carrier frequency is kept constant
throughoutthemeasurement. However, long-termsystematicdriftwillintroduceastaticoffsetof
the FSR sub-carriers from resonance, which can increase the coupling of noise sources such as
laser intensity noise. On the other handclosed-loop tracking, where the FSR estimate is updated
onaquasi-continuousbasiscanbeusedtocontinuouslynulltheFSRestimationerror,potentially
delivering improved performance. Similarly, residual amplitude modulation (RAM) introduced
by the electro-optic modulator (EOM) can also introduce offsets of the FSR sub-carriers from
resonance. When characterised for this system there was no significant RAM at the scale factor
modulation frequency due to the fact that there is no modulation signal driven to the EOM at
this frequency. Further, the effects of RAM would affect closed and open loop implementations
equally. Answering this question will be the subject of future work, however the authors note
that the dynamics anticipated to affect the scale-factor likely occur at the time scale of days
(thermal) or longer (aging), indicating that semi-regular/periodic update of the FSR frequency
via OBC/ground-command will likely be sufficient if further investigation reveals noise coupling
to be a limiting factor in scale-factor determination.
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26026
5.2. Verifying absolute frequency
This paper has discussed the frequency readout scheme as absolute. During the commissioning
and initial acquisition of the GRACE-FO LRI link, the lasers were successfully locked to their
respective optical cavity with negligible deviation from ground-calibrated offsets [6]. This
indicates that neither the laser nor cavities experienced a significant shift in emission or resonant
mode frequencies during launch. For future missions, should such a shift occur, the absolute
optical frequency can be estimated in orbit by comparison of the laser range measurement with
an independent range, likely provided by GPS position information. For GRACE-FO, a≈1000
m time-varying relative-range signal exists at the orbital frequency due to the orbit mismatch
and other effects. On board differential-GPS measurements are estimated to measure the inter-
spacecraft range with<700 µm precision [20], providing better than<1 mm/1 km ≈ 1 : 106
fractional uncertainty. Such uncertainty is sufficient to resolve the 282 THz laser frequency to
within 300 MHz, well below the cavity FSR of≈2 GHz, such that the cavity mode numbernmode,
and therefore absolute laser frequency, can be unambiguously determined.
5.3. Demodulation phase
The proposed implementation illustrated in Fig. 2 shows a dashed line showing an optional
phase synchronisation between the LRP FSR firmware and the SF NCO. Should the phase
synchronisationnotbeimplemented,theFSRreadoutbecomessensitivetoanyphaseorfrequency
drift/offsets between the LRP and SF NCOs. Synchronisation of the LRP and SF NCOs to a
fraction of the SF modulation frequency (Megahertz) would require timing synchronisation of
better than<100 nano-seconds, which is un-achievable with the micro-second synchronization
provided by the GRACE-FO ‘pulse-per-second’ timing reference distributed to modules. Instead,
the SF data can be streamed to the ground from both lock-in demodulation quadratures (cosine
and sine), allowing for the correct phase to be determined in post processing. Verification of
dual-quadrature readout, long with the specification of any associated calibration signals will be
addressed in future work.
6. Conclusions
Laser-only geodesy missions will require a new method to track long term changes in laser
frequency to provide coherence of measured range data over multi-year mission lifetimes. The
readout technique proposed in this paper offers an elegant method of determining fractional
frequency(orlength)changesofastabilisedlaser(cavity)againstanexternalultra-stableexternal
standard(USO).Whencoupledwithcalibrationknowledgeofthecavitymodenumber,theresults
presented here experimentally demonstrated at a fractional absolute laser frequency stability
at <10−9 over a 30 day measurement, exceeding the anticipated 10−8 specification for future
satellite-geodesy missions. Further, the presented readout scheme introduces minimal additional
parts to the flight heritage GRACE-FO LRI baseline design, with the addition of Gigahertz
bandwidth parts only in the waveform synthesizer and a high speed modulator (no major LRP
modifications are anticipated).
Funding. Australian Research Council (OzGrav CE170100004, EQUS CE170100009); Australian Government
Research Training Program (RTP Scholarship); Jet Propulsion Laboratory (NASA JPL/Caltech).
Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Data availability. Data underlying the results presented in this paper are not publicly available at this time but may
be obtained from the authors upon reasonable request.
References
1. B. D. Tapley, S. Bettadpur, J. C. Ries, P. F. Thompson, and M. M. Watkins, “GRACE measurements of mass
variability in the Earth system,” Science305(5683), 503–505 (2004).
Research Article Vol. 29, No. 16 / 2 August 2021 / Optics Express 26027
2. R. P. Kornfeld, B. W. Arnold, M. A. Gross, N. T. Dahya, W. Klipstein, P. F. Gath, and S. Bettadpur, “GRACE-FO:
The Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment Follow-On Mission,” J. Spacecr. Rockets56(3), 931–951 (2019).
3. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine,Thriving on Our Changing Planet: A Decadal Strategy
for Earth Observation from Space (National Academies, 2018).
4. J.Conklin,T.Yu,F.Guzman,B.Klipstein,J.Lee,J.Leitch,K.Numata,S.Petroy,R.E.Spero,B.Ware,andG.Yang,
“LRI Technology Summary and Roadmap for Mass Change Mission, May 2020,” Tech. rep., NASA Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, (2020).
5. K. Nicklaus, S. Cesare, L. Massotti, L. Bonino, S. Mottini, M. Pisani, and P. Silvestrin, “Laser metrology concept
consolidation for NGGM,” CEAS Space J.12(3), 313–330 (2020).
6. K. Abich, A. Abramovici, B. Amparan, A. Baatzsch, B. B. Okihiro, D. C. Barr, M. P. Bize, C. Bogan, C. Braxmaier,
M. J. Burke, K. C. Clark, C. Dahl, K. Dahl, K. Danzmann, M. A. Davis, G. de Vine, J. A. Dickson, S. Dubovitsky, A.
Eckardt, T. Ester, G. F. Barranco, R. Flatscher, F. Flechtner, W. M. Folkner, S. Francis, M. S. Gilbert, F. Gilles, M.
Gohlke, N. Grossard, B. Guenther, P. Hager, J. Hauden, F. Heine, G. Heinzel, M. Herding, M. Hinz, J. Howell, M.
Katsumura, M. Kaufer, W. Klipstein, A. Koch, M. Kruger, K. Larsen, A. Lebeda, T. Leikert, C. C. Liebe, J. Liu, L.
Lobmeyer, C. Mahrdt, T. Mangoldt, K. McKenzie, M. Misfeldt, P. R. Morton, V. Muller, A. T. Murray, D. J. Nguyen,
K. Nicklaus, R. Pierce, J. A. Ravich, G. Reavis, J. Reiche, J. Sanjuan, D. Schutze, C. Seiter, D. Shaddock, B. Sheard,
M. Sileo, R. E. Spero, G. Spiers, G. Stede, M. Stephens, A. Sutton, J. Trinh, K. Voss, D. Wang, R. T. Wang, B. Ware,
H. Wegener, S. Windisch, C. Woodruff, B. Zender, and M. Zimmermann, “In-Orbit Performance of the GRACE
Follow-on Laser Ranging Interferometer,” Phys. Rev. Lett.123(3), 031101 (2019).
7. K. Ghobadi-Far, S. C. Han, C. M. McCullough, D. N. Wiese, D. N. Yuan, F. W. Landerer, J. Sauber, and M. M.
Watkins, “GRACE Follow-On Laser Ranging Interferometer Measurements Uniquely Distinguish Short-Wavelength
Gravitational Perturbations,” Geophys. Res. Lett.47(16), e2020GL089445 (2020).
8. NASA, “ORCLS - Optical-Radio Coherence for Laser Stability,” https://techport.nasa.gov/view/94040.
9. R. G. DeVoe and R. G. Brewer, “Laser-frequency division and stabilization,” Phys. Rev. A30(5), 2827–2829 (1984).
10. H. Y. Wen, G. Kruizinga, M. Paik, F. Landerer, W. Bertiger, C. Sakumura, T. Bandikova, and C. Mccullough,
“Gravityrecoveryandclimateexperimentfollow-on(GRACE-FO)level-1dataproductuserhandbook,”JPLD-56935
(URS270772) 11, (2019).
11. G. Weaver, M. Reinhart, and R. Wallis, “Enhancing the art of space operations-progress in JHU/APL ultra-stable
oscillator capabilities,” inProceedings of the 40th Annual Precise Time and Time Interval Systems and Applications
Meeting(2008), pp. 57–68.
12. B. Bachman, G. de Vine, J. Dickson, S. Dubovitsky, J. Liu, W. Klipstein, K. McKenzie, R. E. Spero, A. J. Sutton, B.
Ware, and C. Woodruff, “Flight phasemeter on the Laser Ranging Interferometer on the GRACE Follow-On mission,”
J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.840, 012011 (2017).
13. M. Misfeldt, V. Muller, H. Wegener, L. Muller, and G. Heinzel, “Scale factor of the laser ranging interferometer in
GRACE follow-on,” GRACE Science Team Meeting, (2020).
14. R. W. P. Drever, J. L. Hall, F. V. Kowalski, J. Hough, G. M. Ford, A. J. Munley, and H. Ward, “Laser phase and
frequency stabilization using an optical resonator,” Appl. Phys. B31(2), 97–105 (1983).
15. T. T. Y. Lam, B. J. J. Slagmolen, J. H. Chow, I. C. M. Littler, D. E. McClelland, and D. Shaddock, “Digital Laser
Frequency Stabilization Using an Optical Cavity,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron.46(8), 1178–1183 (2010).
16. R. Thompson, W. M. Folkner, G. de Vine, W. Klipstein, K. McKenzie, R. E. Spero, N. Yu, M. Stephens, J. Leitch, R.
Pierce, T. T. Y. Lam, and D. Shaddock, “A flight-like optical reference cavity for GRACE follow-on laser frequency
stabilization,” in2011 Joint Conference of the IEEE International Frequency Control and the European Frequency
and Time Forum (FCS) Proceedings (2011), pp. 1–3.
17. N. Chabbra, A. R. Wade, E. R. Rees, A. J. Sutton, A. Stochino, R. L. Ward, D. A. Shaddock, and K. McKenzie,
“High stability laser locking to an optical cavity using tilt locking,” Opt. Lett.46(13), 3199–3202 (2021).
18. Incorporated Corning, 7972 ULE Product Information https://www.corning.com/media/worldwide/csm/documents/
7972%20ULE%20Product%20Information%20Jan%202016.pdf (2016).
19. GRACE-FO Level 1A/B data is available at http://podaac.jpl.nasa.gov.
20. D. Gu, B. Ju, J. Liu, and J. Tu, “Enhanced GPS-based GRACE baseline determination by using a new strategy for
ambiguity resolution and relative phase center variation corrections,” Acta Astronaut.138, 176–184 (2017).
