An open and ﬂexible digital phase-locked loop for optical metrology
This article may be downloaded for personal use only. Any other use requires prior permission of the author and AIP Publishing. This
article appeared in Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 89, 093103 (2018) and may be found at https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5039344
An open and ﬂexible digital phase-locked loop for optical metrology
Alex Tourigny-Plante,1 Vincent Michaud-Belleau, 1 Nicolas Bourbeau H´ ebert,1 Hugo Bergeron, 1
J´ erˆ ome Genest,1, a) and Jean-Daniel Deschˆ enes1, 2, b)
1)Centre d‘optique, photonique et laser, Universit´ e Laval, Qu´ ebec, QC, G1V 0A6,
Canada
2)OctoSig Inc. Qu´ ebec, Canada
(Dated: 7 May 2018)
This paper presents an open and ﬂexible digital phase lock loop optimized for laser stabi-
lization systems. It is implemented on a cheap and easily accessible FPGA-based digital
electronics platform (Red Pitaya) running a customizable open-source ﬁrmware. A PC-
based software interface allows controlling the platform and optimizing the loop parameters
remotely. Several tools are included to allow measurement of quantities of interest smoothly
and rapidly. To demonstrate the platform’s capabilities, we built a ﬁber noise canceler over
a 400 m ﬁber link. Noise cancellation was achieved over a 30 kHz bandwidth, a value limited
mainly by the delays introduced by the actuator and by the round-trip propagation over
the ﬁber link. We measured a total latency of 565 ns for the platform itself, limiting the
theoretically achievable control bandwidth to approximately 225 kHz.
I. INTRODUCTION
The use of digital electronics for optical systems and
servo loops is steadily gaining traction. For example,
digital phase meters 1 are used for gravitational waves
detection2–4 and digital phase-locked loops (DPLL) are
deployed for frequency comb locking 5,6, Doppler cancel-
lation in optical links7–9 as well as optical time transfer10.
This is due to several advantages of digital servos such as
software reconﬁgurability, easy replication and the pos-
sibility of having advanced diagnostic tools 11.
In applications where low latency and large control
bandwidth are important, ﬁeld programmable gate ar-
rays (FPGAs) appear as platforms of choice thanks to
their intrinsically parallel and reconﬁgurable architec-
ture. Digital platform can also directly track the phase
of the signal instead of its trigonometric representation,
which causes ambiguity (i.e. cos 2 π = cos 4π). This
wider tracking possibility allows using tools to character-
ize the external system even when the free running sys-
tem has phase noise greater than the linear region of the
trigonometric function. However, the complexities asso-
ciated with designing and programming a mixed mode
electronics board where fast analog signals are digitized,
processed and re-generated in real time are however usu-
ally not in a typical laser metrologist’s tool chest and
the price of FPGA-based systems is often prohibitive.
These constitute important entry barriers preventing de-
ployment of powerful digital platforms to a wider set of
optical applications.
In this paper, we present an open DPLL platform built
around the Red Pitaya, a cheap and easily accessible
FPGA-based board12. The Red Pitaya can be purchased
for a few hundred dollars, a fraction of what commer-
cial analog lock boxes cost. The platform described here
a)Electronic mail: jgenest@gel.ulaval.ca
b)Electronic mail: octosigconsulting@gmail.com
consists of a ﬁrmware installed on a Red Pitaya board as
well as a Python-based PC graphical user interface (GUI)
that remotely connects to boards in order to monitor
and optimize the servo loop performance. The ﬁrmware
and software are open-source and can be downloaded,
along with the installation instructions and user guide,
using the link in the references13. The software should be
cross-platform, but the installation instructions are only
provided for Windows and MacOSX.
This work is based on the open-source design presented
in5,14 now ported and adapted to Red Pitaya boards so
that custom hardware is no longer required. An optional
internal voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) has also been
added to facilitate the integration with common opti-
cal components, for example the acousto-optic modula-
tor (AOM) used to frequency-shift an optical ﬁeld in a
ﬁber noise canceled link, as presented in section III. Al-
though this platform is not limited to optical metrology,
the tools described in section II were optimized with that
application in mind since the residual phase is not as im-
portant when dealing with much higher optical carrier
frequencies (compared to RF signals) and since there is
a stronger focus on lowering the cycle slip probability.
For some applications, FPGA platforms can be highly
optimized to perform a single task 7 while in other cases
the goal is to oﬀer as many digital instruments as
possible15,16. The platform presented here sits in be-
tween these two extremes. The goal is to provide laser
scientists with a straightforward access to a fast and ﬂexi-
ble DPLL. With the design complexity tackled on generic
oﬀ-the-shelf commercial electronics, the replication cost
of this system is very low and the DPLL can easily be
deployed in a variety of optical applications.
II. FIRMWARE ARCHITECTURE
Red Pitaya boards are based on a Xilinx Zynq 7010
FPGA and are programmed using Vivado 2015.4 with
a mix of VHDL and Verilog. The board is equipped
arXiv:1804.01028v2  [eess.SP]  8 Jul 2019
An open and ﬂexible digital phase-locked loop for optical metrology 2
with two analog inputs and two analog outputs. The
analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters (ADCs
and DACs) have a resolution of 14 bits (a 10 bit version is
also available and is compatible with the DPLL described
here) and are, by default, driven by the same 125 MHz
crystal that is clocking the FPGA. The Red Pitaya’s in-
puts are equipped with 50 MHz low-pass anti-aliasing
ﬁlters17. Each board can thus provide two DPLL that
can be independent or interlinked, as described below.
Figure 1 shows the complete representation of the
DPLL architecture. For each channel, the signal is ac-
quired by an ADC. Its in-phase and quadrature (I/Q)
components are extracted via multiplication with the sine
and the cosine of a reference signal whose frequency is de-
ﬁned by a rational fraction on 48 bits chosen by the user
(fref =k/248 ·fclk)18. The I/Q signals are low-pass ﬁl-
tered digitally with a selectable bandwidth (3.75 MHz,
15.5 MHz or 31 MHz). An arctangent operation is then
used to extract the phase error and a diﬀerence of succes-
sive phase measurements (numerical derivative) is used to
alleviate dynamic range issues with the numerical repre-
sentations in the FPGA since a phase ramp is unbounded
while its derivative is bounded. The modulo [−π,π ] oper-
ator handles the wrapping of the phase slope produced by
the arctan. The phase increment signal is the input of the
loop ﬁlter implementing a proportional/integral/double
integral/derivative (PII2D) controller 19. The double in-
tegrator term ensures a null static error even with the nu-
merical phase derivative previously made. The resources
usage for this platform is presented in table I.
Resource Used Available
Look-up table (LUT) 8449 17600
LUT RAM 370 6000
Flip-Flops (FF) 12505 35200
Block RAM (BRAM) 53.50 60
DSP Slices 69 80
Global clock buﬀer (BUFG) 9 32
Mixed-mode clock manager 1 2(MMCM)
Phase-locked loop (PLL) 2 2
TABLE I. Red Pitaya resources usage.
The ADC chips used in the Red Pitaya have a nom-
inal time-domain signal to noise ratio (SNR t) of 73 dB
(compared to a theoretical 86 dB for 14 bits) but the
overall performance of the Red Pitaya system with
14 bits ADCs is a SNR t of 63 dB, corresponding to
10.2 eﬀective number of bits (ENOB). The time domain
SNRt is equivalent to the spectral SNR f in a band-
width from 0 to fs/2. The spectral SNR f is the SNR
seen with a bandwidth of BW Hz and is described by
SNRf = SNRt + 10 log10( fs
2BW ). For instance, when op-
erating at a 125 MS/s sampling rate, this provides a SNR
over 72 dB in a 7.5 MHz bandwidth, which is well above
the SNR usually obtained in beats involving frequency
combs20.
The output of the loop ﬁlter is encoded into 16 bits.
When the VCO is not connected, the 14 most signiﬁ-
cant bits (MSBs) are directly sent to the 14-bit DAC
and mapped to a voltage between −1 and +1 V at the
SMA outputs. When the VCO is connected, the 16 bits
are instead used to represent a frequency between 0 and
the Nyquist frequency ( fs/2). The 16 bits are mapped
such that 0 = 0 Hz and 2 16 − 1 = 62.5 MHz, correspond-
ing to a gain of 31.25 MHz/V. Adding an oﬀset at the
output via the control software allows adjusting the qui-
escent frequency. The desired tone is generated using an
internal direct digital synthesis (DDS) and this signal is
sent to the DAC with a user selected amplitude and DC
oﬀset.
The addition of a dither signal allows for an easy char-
acterization of the system to be controlled. The dither
module generates a square wave with a selectable ampli-
tude and frequency. This signal is added just after the
loop ﬁlter’s output and thus it constantly excites the sys-
tem being controlled. Lock-in detection 21 of this square
wave at the input side of the module allows measuring
the controlled system’s gain in Hz/V, including its sign.
This gives the operator a constantly updated knowledge
of the loop’s sign and is useful for performing loop tuning
in relevant units.
The loop ﬁlter parameters are user selectable in the
GUI. The proportional gain ( kp) is deﬁned in dB rela-
tive to the open-loop DC gain of the system ( kc), such
that the linear gain is Kp = 10kp/20/kc. The integrator,
double integrator and derivative are speciﬁed by their
crossover frequencies,fi,fii andfd, respectively. The in-
tegrator and the diﬀerentiator crossover frequencies can
be deﬁned either by the 0 dB crossover or by the kp
crossover. The double integrator crossover frequency is
deﬁned by the intersection with the integrator. Finally,
a ﬁrst-order ﬁlter implements a roll-oﬀ frequency for the
diﬀerentiator (fd f). Table II presents the equations link-
ing the loop ﬁlter gain values (Kp,Ki,Kii andKd) to the
user settings and the system parameters. A factor 2 π/fs
takes into account the fact that the numerical derivative
and integrators are relative to the sampling frequency
(fs).
When including the previous numerical derivative, the
PII2D controller in fact acts as a PIDD 2. For most
systems being controlled, the double diﬀerentiator term
would not be used and is normally turned oﬀ. However,
this can be useful for example with a system containing
two dominants ﬁrst order roll-oﬀs.
Variable Relative to 0 dB Relative to Kp
Kp 10k p/ 20 1
k c
Ki
1
k c
fi
2π
f s
Kp fi
2π
f s
Kii Ki fii
2π
f s
Kd
1
k c
1
f d
f s
2π Kp
1
f d
f s
2π
D ﬁlter fdf
2π
f s
TABLE II. Loop ﬁlter gain equations. kc: system open-loop
DC gain, fs: sampling frequency (125 MHz)
.
Diagnostic information can be sent from the Red
Pitaya to the PC-based control software. The spectrum
An open and ﬂexible digital phase-locked loop for optical metrology 3
FPGA
Legend
dθ
ADC
DifferentialPhaseExtraction
Freq Counter Loop Filter  Dither  
Mux
Offset
Mux
ADC
DAC
VNA
Differential Phase Extraction
Arctan ModuloDiffθ
I
Q
cos(2π t)fref
sin(2π t)fref
fref
Loop Filter
Mux
K p
K i
s
K d⋅s
K ii
s2
Offset
Mux
Mux
DAC
Lock-in module 
Dither
VCO
Freq counter 
Offset
 
Communicationfrom computer Communicationto computer Oscilloscope tocomputer 
x
x
~
+
+
++
FIG. 1. Complete block diagram of the DPLL platform’s ﬁrmware. Red arrows represent the communication with the PC
software and blue dots represent the test points at which signals can be shown in the PC software. The second channel is a
duplicate of the ﬁrst. ADC: Analog-to-digital converter, MUX: Multiplexer, VNA: Vector network analyzer, VCO: Voltage-
controlled oscillator, DAC: Digital-to-analog converter.
of all signals represented by a blue dot in ﬁgure 1 can be
computed and displayed in real-time in the GUI; tempo-
ral representations are also available. Baseband compo-
nents are represented in a conventional I/Q diagram for
analysis at-a-glance while the phase and frequency noise
power spectral density (PSD) and total integrated phase
noise are also continuously updated. A zero dead-time
frequency counter with a 1 second gate time allows mon-
itoring and logging the lock’s long-term performance.
A vector network analyzer (VNA) integrated to the
platform makes the measurement of the system’s trans-
fer function possible. Measurements of the magnitude
and phase are displayed in the PC-based software, allow-
ing for an easy tuning of the controllers, and data can
also be exported for further analysis. When the internal
VCO is used, its contribution is included in the measured
VNA’s transfer function. Thus, the measured frequency
response includes the contributions of the VCO, external
setup and delays associated to the FPGA processing with
an input calibrated in Hz and an output calibrated in V.
Software controllable multiplexers allow using the
FPGA in three diﬀerent control scenarios. First, the
platform can operate as two independent control loops
each using their own ADC, demodulation block, loop ﬁl-
ter and DAC. For instance, one channel can be used to
lock the carrier oﬀset of a frequency comb and the other
to lock one comb tooth to a reference laser, as done by
Sinclair et al. 5. A single Red Pitaya box can therefore
fully reference a frequency comb. The only caveat in this
mode is that only one VCO is available and thus only
one of the channel can use it.
The second control scenario consists in having two par-
allel loops using only one input. In that case, both chan-
nels share the same ADC and demodulation block. After
the diﬀerential phase extraction, the error signal how-
ever proceeds independently in the two distinct loop ﬁl-
ters with potentially diﬀerent transfer functions. This
allows controlling two diﬀerent actuators acting on the
same system with diﬀerent frequency responses. For in-
stance, one might want to close a loop with a fast but
short-stroked piezoelectric actuator on one side and, on
the other side, a slower actuator with longer stroke 5.
In the third scenario, it is possible to seed the output
of the ﬁrst channel to the input of the second ﬁlter loop.
This conﬁguration can be used to maintain the output of
the ﬁrst channel around a certain setpoint by controlling
another actuator with the second channel. This method
is used to stay in the active range of a fast actuator by
relying on a slow actuator. For example, Sinclair et al.
used a slow piezoelectric actuator to stay within the dy-
namic range of a fast piezoelectric actuator 5.
The whole system latency is τ = 407 ns (565 ns with
the VCO), which limits the noise rejection bandwidth
to approximately 1 /8τ = 300 kHz (225 kHz with the
VCO). This estimation of the maximum bandwidth as-
sumes that a loop is closed around a ﬁrst order system
with π/4 of phase margin. Of the 407 ns latency, 207 ns
comes from the demodulation process and the remaining
comes from the loop-ﬁlter, ADC and DAC.
The communication between the FPGA and the com-
An open and ﬂexible digital phase-locked loop for optical metrology 4
puter is made via a TCP connection controlled by the
Python software. A notable feature of this updated ver-
sion is the capability to disconnect the PC control soft-
ware, allowing locks to operate in a standalone mode, and
reconnect when supervision, data acquisition or modiﬁ-
cations of the parameters are needed.
III. FIBER NOISE CANCELER
A ﬁber noise canceler (or Doppler canceler link) is a
commonly used tool in optical frequency metrology7–9,22.
Here, we used a Doppler cancellation link to validate the
operation of the DPLL on the Red Pitaya platform and to
demonstrate new features, such as the integrated VCO.
Figure 2 shows the experimental setup used to achieve
the stable transfer of a laser frequency to a remote loca-
tion over a ﬁber link. In the chosen conﬁguration, part of
the laser light reaching the remote site is reﬂected to the
transmission site. This round-trip light thus experiences,
at low frequencies, double the delay and double the phase
ﬂuctuations imposed by the link on the transmitted sig-
nal, as shown by Williams et al. 22. Compensation for the
measured ﬂuctuations is done using an AOM fed by the
Red Pitaya’s new feature, the VCO, which is controlled
by the DPLL.
Local site FPGA 
Remote site
Laser
AOM 
(+~27MHz) 
98/2 
Coupler
90/10 
Coupler
50/50 
Coupler
Output 400m Delay
PC
ADC
Differential 
Phase
Extraction
Loop
Filter
VCODAC
Ampliﬁer 
+ν0
fref
2
Balanced
photodetectorν0
ν+fref0
FIG. 2. Experimental setup for the ﬁber noise canceled
link. Solid lines represent optical ﬁbers and dashed lines
represent electrical interconnects. In our experimentation,
fref = 54 M Hz. PC: polarization controller, AOM: acousto-
optic modulator
At the local site, the beat note between the local os-
cillator (LO) and the reﬂected signal is fed to the DPLL.
Its phase contains information about the ﬂuctuations in
the link’s optical length that have to be corrected. As the
nominal frequency of the AOM used here is 27 MHz, I/Q
demodulation is performed with a reference frequency of
54 MHz in order to extract the phase error. The out-
put oﬀset is adjusted to set the quiescent frequency at
27 MHz.
In order to characterize the AOM used in the exper-
iment, we measured its transfer function with a diﬀer-
ent setup in which a beat between the input and output
signals of the AOM was acquired. The resulting curve,
displayed in blue in ﬁgure 3, represents the transfer func-
106
107
108
Gain [Hz/V]
103 104 105 106
Frequency [Hz]
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Phase [rad]
HAOM+VCO
Hsys measured
Hsys predicted
FIG. 3. Transfer function of the AOM-VCO combination
(blue) and the complete Doppler cancellation link (orange), as
measured by the platform’s VNA. The AOM-VCO combina-
tion transfer function (blue) is use to determine the complete
theoretical transfer function (red). The complete experimen-
tal transfer function (orange) matches the theoretical one.
tion of the combination of AOM and VCO. The AOM’s
latency, 1.5µs, was computed from the transfer function
based on the approximation that it mainly acts as a delay
in the frequency range of interest. Therefore, this delay is
larger than the intrinsic FPGA’s latency and will always
lead to a signiﬁcantly lower noise rejection bandwidth.
Multiplying the AOM+VCO transfer function by the
ﬁber optic delay and the cosine square shape of the dou-
ble pass through the AOM leads to an excellent superpo-
sition with the transfer function measured by the VNA
for the system shown in ﬁgure 2. The ﬁrst zero of the
cosine at 0.125 MHz is determined by the ﬁber link dif-
ferential delay which is here 2.0µs (400 m). With a total
eﬀective delay of 4.0µs (optical ﬁber 2.0µs, AOM 1.5µs
and FPGA 0.5µs), the maximum achievable closed-loop
bandwidth in this demonstration is thus 31 .25 kHz.
When the lock is active, the VNA can still be used to
output perturbations in the system in order to character-
ize the closed-loop noise rejection, as shown in ﬁgure 4a).
This ﬁgure displays the theoretical gain for uncorrelated
distributed ﬁber noise at the remote link output, which is
one of the noise our lock aims to cancel. To validate the
model used to determine this transfer function, the ex-
perimental and predicted transfer functions for the VCO
noise at the local site are shown. This experimental curve
was easier to obtain since it could be measured without
the addition of external components as the VCO was the
only actuator. However, one could use a diﬀerent chan-
nel to control an actuator to introduce disturbance at
another point in the system.
A visual representation of the obtained PSD is given
in ﬁgure 4b). This ﬁgure shows both closed-loop (purple
curve) and open-loop (orange curve) PSDs at the remote
site. In this ﬁgure, it is possible to observe that the sys-
tem noise rejection bandwidth is around 30 kHz, which
ﬁts with the expected maximum bandwidth. The PSDs
presented here are the result of a beat between the laser
and the remote signal. Therefore, the displayed interfer-
ometric phase noise is necessarily lower than the laser’s
An open and ﬂexible digital phase-locked loop for optical metrology 5
phase noise below 1/(4τ)23. We can thus conclude that,
after propagation in the Doppler-canceled link, the phase
noise added by out-of-loop ﬁbers would be negligible with
respect to laser phase noise.
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Gain [dB]
(a)
kp = -9.0 dB
fi  =  1.5e3 Hz
fii =  3.0e3 Hz
fd =  
∞ Hz
Predicted fiber noise gain (remote)
Predicted VCO noise gain (local)
Measured VCO noise gain (local)
101 102 103 104 105 106
Frequency [Hz]
10-12
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
Phase noise PSD [rad2/Hz]
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
Phase [rad]
(b) Open-loop, estimated laser contribution
Open-loop, measured
Closed-loop, predicted from open-loop
Closed-loop measured
Estimated out-of-loop noise
Closed-loop integrated phase noise
FIG. 4. a) Predicted closed-loop transfer functions for various
noises and disturbances present in the system. The built-in
VNA was used to measure the noise rejection transfer function
for noise injected at the local end of the link (yellow). The re-
markable agreement with the prediction (orange) yields cred-
ibility to other predictions based on the same set of estimated
parameters. b) Comparison of the remote output phase noise
PSD measured with an out-of-loop oscilloscope. The closed-
loop prediction curve (yellow) is obtained by multiplying the
open-loop phase noise PSD (orange) by the appropriate trans-
fer functions, assuming that it is largely dominated by laser
noise. A rough estimation of the out-of-loop noise (green)
was performed by bypassing the 400 m delay to directly con-
nect the AOM to the remote site. Obviously, this out-of-loop
noise constitutes the main contribution to closed-loop noise
below 1 kHz; since its level is lowered when we activate an
anti-vibration table, we conclude that it is most likely due to
residual building vibrations. The cumulative integrated phase
noise (blue dots) is also shown.
IV. CONCLUSION
In summary, we have demonstrated the use of an
open-source DPLL platform by performing an optical fre-
quency transfer over a ﬁber noise canceled link. The tools
available on this platform allow to simplify the analy-
sis of the system by oﬀering an on-board VNA to mea-
sure transfer functions and by providing various real-time
quantities such as PSD, I/Q, spectrum, time signal, fre-
quency error and loop ﬁlter’s transfer function. The dif-
ferent tools and control scenarios allow the use of this
cheap and accessible platform for several optical applica-
tions. Since this platform is open source, we invite ev-
eryone to contribute to its improvement, for example by
minimizing the latency to increase the achievable locking
bandwidth.
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors want to thank the support from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada(NSERC).
1C. Wang and J. D. E. E.D. Burnham-Fay, Precision Engineering
, 133 (2017).
2D. Shaddock, B. Ware, P. G. Halverson, R. E. Spero, and
B. Klipstein, AIP Conference Proceedings 873, 654 (2006),
http://aip.scitation.org/doi/pdf/10.1063/1.2405113.
3T. G. McRae, S. Ngo, D. A. Shaddock, M. T. L.
Hsu, and M. B. Gray, Opt. Lett. 39, 1752 (2014),
http://ol.osa.org/abstract.cfm?URI=ol-39-7-1752.
4K.-S. Isleif, O. Gerberding, S. K¨ ohlenbeck, A. Sutton, B. Sheard,
S. Goßler, D. Shaddock, G. Heinzel, and K. Danzmann, Opt.
Express 22, 24689 (2014).
5L. C. Sinclair, J.-D. Deschenes, L. Sonderhouse, W. C. Swann,
I. H. Khader, E. Baumann, N. R. Newbury, and I. Cod-
dington, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 86, 081301 (2015),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4928163.
6M. Lezius, T. Wilken, C. Deutsch, M. Giunta, O. Mandel,
A. Thaller, V. Schkolnik, M. Schiemangk, A. Dinkelaker, A. Ko-
hfeldt, A. Wicht, M. Krutzik, A. Peters, O. Hellmig, H. Duncker,
K. Sengstock, P. Windpassinger, K. Lampmann, T. H¨ ulsing,
T. W. H¨ ansch, and R. Holzwarth, Optica 3, 1381 (2016).
7A. C. C. Olaya, S. Micalizio, M. Ortolano, C. E. Calosso, E. Ru-
biola, and J. M. Friedt, “Digital electronics based on red pitaya
platform for coherent ﬁber links,” (2016).
8S. Droste, F. Ozimek, T. Udem, K. Predehl, T. W. H¨ ansch,
H. Schnatz, G. Grosche, and R. Holzwarth, Phys. Rev. Lett.
111, 110801 (2013).
9C. E. Calosso, C. Clivati, and S. Micalizio, IEEE Transactions
on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control 63, 646
(2016).
10J.-D. Deschˆ enes, L. C. Sinclair, F. R. Giorgetta, W. C.
Swann, E. Baumann, H. Bergeron, M. Cermak, I. Codding-
ton, and N. R. Newbury, Phys. Rev. X 6, 021016 (2016),
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.6.021016.
11C. E. Calosso, E. Bertacco, D. Calonico, C. Clivati, G. A.
Costanzo, M. Frittelli, F. Levi, A. Mura, and A. Godone, Opt.
Lett. 39, 1177 (2014).
12Instrumentation Technologies LLC, “Red Pitaya,” https://
redpitaya.com/about-us/ ().
13Jean-Daniel Deschenes, “Digital PLL code base,” https://
github.com/jddes/Frequency-comb-DPLL.
14J.-D. Deschenes, L. Sinclair, N. R. Newbury, and
I. Coddington, “Fpga-based digital control box for phase
stabilization of a frequency comb (NIST version),”
https://www.nist.gov/services-resources/software/
fpga-based-digital-control-box-phase-stabilization-
frequency-comb.
15Liquid Instruments, “Moku:Lab,” http://www.
liquidinstruments.com/.
16L. Neuhaus, R. Metzdorﬀ, S. Chua, T. Jacqmin, T. Briant,
A. Heidmann, P. F. Cohadon, and S. Delglise, “Pyrpl (python
red pitaya lockbox) x2014; an open-source software package for
fpga-controlled quantum optics experiments,” (2017).
17Instrumentation Technologies LLC, “Red Pitaya documenta-
tion,” http://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ ().
An open and ﬂexible digital phase-locked loop for optical metrology 6
18J. A. Webb, “Digital quadrature demodulator,” (1978), uS
Patent 4,090,145.
19K. H. Ang, G. Chong, and Y. Li, IEEE transactions on control
systems technology 13, 559 (2005).
20J.-D. Deschˆ enes and J. Genest, Opt. Express23, 9295 (2015).
21J. H. Scoﬁeld, American Journal of Physics 62, 129 (1994),
https://doi.org/10.1119/1.17629.
22P. A. Williams, W. C. Swann, and N. R. New-
bury, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 25, 1284 (2008),
http://josab.osa.org/abstract.cfm?URI=josab-25-8-1284.
23V. Michaud-Belleau, H. Bergeron, P. S. Light, N. B. Hbert, J. D.
Deschnes, A. N. Luiten, and J. Genest, Metrologia 53, 1154
(2016).