Tracking length and diﬀerential wavefront sensing signals from quadrant photodiodes in
heterodyne interferometers with digital phase-locked loop readout
Gerhard Heinzel,1,∗ Miguel Dovale ´Alvarez,1,† Alvise Pizzella,1 Nils Brause,1 and Juan Jos´e Esteban Delgado1
1Albert-Einstein Institut (Max-Planck Institut f¨ ur Gravitationsphysik),
Callinstrasse 38, D-30167 Hannover , Germany
We propose a method to track signals from quadrant photodiodes (QPD) in heterodyne laser interferometers
that employ digital phase-locked loops for phase readout. Instead of separately tracking the four segments
from the QPD and then combining the results into length and Di ﬀerential Wavefront Sensing (DWS) signals,
this method employs a set of coupled tracking loops that operate directly on the combined length and angular
signals. Beneﬁts are increased signal-to-noise ratio in the loops and the possibility to adapt the loop bandwidths
to the diﬀerent dynamical behavior of the signals being tracked, which now correspond to physically meaningful
observables. We demonstrate an improvement of up to 6 dB over single-segment tracking, which makes this
scheme an attractive solution for applications in precision inter-satellite laser interferometry in ultra-low-light
conditions.
Phys. Rev. Applied 14, 054013 − 6 November 2020
DOI:10.1103/PhysRevApplied.14.054013
I. INTRODUCTION
Laser interferometry is a powerful method to measure tiny
distance variations as changes of optical pathlengths. When
the optical pathlengths cannot be kept constant to within a
small fraction of a wavelength, heterodyne interferometry is
frequently applied, i.e., by interfering two laser beams that
have a ﬁnite frequency di ﬀerence. The interference pattern
is recorded with a photodiode, which produces a photocurrent
with a sinusoidal component at the heterodyne frequency. Dif-
ferential changes of optical pathlength are then converted into
phase changes of that sinusoidal beatnote, which are measured
with a phasemeter instrument. Heterodyne laser interferome-
ters have been employed with great success in space-based
gravity missions [1, 2], which require high precision displace-
ment sensors with a large dynamic range.
Several techniques exist to perform this phase measure-
ment with sub-picometer precision in the millihertz frequency
band as required for applications in gravimetry, gradiome-
try, and gravitational-wave detection [3–12]. When the het-
erodyne frequency changes with time, as e.g., over inter-
spacecraft optical links such as the LISA mission [13, 14] or
the Laser Ranging Interferometer (LRI) on GRACE Follow-
On [15, 16], the usual technique is to employ a Digital Phase-
Locked Loop (DPLL) [7–12, 17] architecture to track the am-
plitude, frequency and phase of the beatnote, even when the
received beam is sensed at sub-picowatt power level due to the
beam divergence over the large propagation distances typical
of inter-satellite laser links.
In many applications of laser interferometers, such as in
gravitational reference sensors [18], spacecraft attitude con-
∗ gerhard.heinzel@aei.mpg.de
† miguel.dovale@aei.mpg.de
CD
BA Time
Photocurrent
CD
BA Time
Photocurrent
CD
BA Time
Photocurrent
CD
BA Time
Photocurrent
Photocurrent
Time
QPD
FIG. 1. Illustration of the Di ﬀerential Wavefront Sensing method.
Two waves impinge on the surface of a quadrant photodiode (QPD)
at an angle. The upper and lower segments of the QPD thus measure
diﬀerent phase oﬀsets between the interfering wavefronts. In the case
of heterodyne interference, this angular misalignment between wave-
fronts manifests as shifts of the phase of the measured photocurrent
beatnote signals.
trol [19], or precision laser beam pointing to remote space-
craft [20], it is beneﬁcial or even essential to determine not
only the relative optical pathlength change between the two
interfering beams, but also the angle between their wave-
fronts, since the latter is a very sensitive measurement of mis-
alignments in the optical system. The standard technique to
achieve this angular measurement is Di ﬀerential Wavefront
Sensing (DWS) [21, 22], which uses a quadrant photodiode
(QPD) to detect the interference pattern. The average phase
over the four segments represents the length signal, while the
diﬀerence between left and right or top and bottom represent
horizontal and vertical misalignments, respectively (see Fig-
ure 1).
In previous implementations, the phase measurement is ap-
plied separately to each segment of the diode, and the results
are then combined. This paper describes a method to track
the phases of the beatnotes from the four segments of a quad-
rant photodiode with DPLLs. In Section II, the function of
a DPLL as a phasemeter core is summarized. The standard
application of four independent DPLLs to the segments of
a QPD is described in Section III, and the proposed scheme
in Section IV. A noise analysis of the new technique, with
a comparison against the conventional method, is reported in
Section V, followed by a conclusion in Section VI.
arXiv:2005.00003v2  [physics.ins-det]  14 Nov 2020
2
II. PHASE MEASUREMENT WITH DIGITAL
PHASE-LOCKED LOOPS
The principle of a DPLL is to generate a digital sine wave
in a Numerically Controlled Oscillator (NCO), and to make
it track the incoming sinusoidal beatnote signal in frequency
and phase. After appropriate signal conditioning, the incom-
ing signal is ﬁrst digitized in an Analog-to-Digital converter
(ADC), and all remaining processing happens in the digital
domain, typically implemented in a Field-Programmable Gate
Array (FPGA) for the tracking part, see Figure 2.
The NCO consists of a Phase Increment Register (PIR) that
represents the instantaneous signal frequency, a Phase Accu-
mulator (PA) which holds the integral of the frequency, i.e. the
instantaneous phase, and a Look-Up-Table (LUT) that con-
verts the phase into a sine wave and optionally also a co-
sine wave. The ADC and all digital blocks are driven syn-
chronously from a common clock, which sets the reference
for any single phase measurement.
In order to make the NCO sine signal track the incoming
signal, both are mixed in a multiplier that acts as phase de-
tector, and the phase deviation thus measured is used as error
signal in a servo loop. When the loop is closed and locked,
both the incoming and the NCO sine signal have the same fre-
quency, and their phase is shifted by 90◦, such that their prod-
uct, the error signal, has zero average. Incoming and NCO
sine signal are said to be “in Quadrature” (denoted by ‘Q’). An
optional second branch multiplies the incoming signal with a
digital cosine signal, which is then “In Phase” (‘I’) and which
can be used to measure the amplitude of the incoming signal.
Lowpass ﬁlters after the mixers suppress the second harmonic
of the signal frequency (‘2 f ’), a by-product of the multiplica-
tion, in order to prevent it from circulating around the loop in
an undesired non-linear process. The primary achievement of
such a DPLL is that frequency and phase now exist in digi-
tal form in the PIR and PA registers, respectively, within the
NCO from where they can be directly read out.
More speciﬁcally, the PIR holds the instantaneous sig-
nal frequency ω in units of cycles per clock period, with
0 < ω < 0.5. It slowly varies as the input signal frequency
changes. It is integrated in the PA which always has a frac-
tional part ϕ, with 0 ≤ ϕ < 1 cycles, which is used by the
LUTs. It follows a rapid sawtooth function. In most cases, the
integer number of cycles (wavelengths) must also be tracked.
This can be achieved by including extra bits in the PA that rep-
resent the integer number of cycles. We denote that extended
PA by Φ, with
ϕ = Φ mod 1 (1)
simply being the fractional part of Φ. The total phase Φ is
an ever increasing ramp. Instead of using extra bits in the
PA, the total phase can in principle also be reconstructed by
integrating ω externally.
Among the many performance parameters of a DPLL, most
important here is the ability to continuously track the input
signal without cycle slips, i.e. integer errors in Φ caused by
excess noise in the input signal. That robustness can be op-
Multiplier
2f ﬁlter
PA PIRFractional
sine
LUT
cosine
LUT
Servo
Q
Input from ADC
PA
I
PIR
(PI control)
Numerically controlled oscillator
ω 
ϕ 
ᵠ
FIG. 2. Functional blocks of a Digital Phase-Locked Loop (DPLL).
The input signal from the ADC is separately mixed with a sine and
a cosine delivered by the numerically controlled oscillator (NCO),
yielding the ‘in Quadrature’ Q and an ‘in Phase’ I signals. The sec-
ond harmonic of the beatnote frequency 2f is suppressed by low-pass
ﬁltering these signals. The Q signal is then used as error signal for
the servo. The output of the PI controller gives the instantaneous sig-
nal frequency, and is stored in the Phase Increment Register (PIR).
This is then integrated and stored in the Phase Accumulator (PA),
which is fed to the sine and cosine look up tables (LUT) that close
the loop.
timized by carefully adapting the servo gain to the signal dy-
namics and enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the
input signal [11, 17, 23].
III. DIFFERENTIAL W A VEFRONT SENSING WITH DPLL
PHASEMETERS
If a QPD is used in order to implement DWS, the standard
procedure is to connect four independent DPLLs to the four
segments A, B, C and D of the QPD. We call their error sig-
nals EA. . .ED, their PA register contents ΦA . . .ΦD, and the
fractional parts of the latter ϕA . . . ϕD. They are combined to
form the output signals:
x = ΦA + ΦB + ΦC + ΦD
4 , (2)
α = ϕA− ϕB + ϕC− ϕD
2 , (3)
β = ϕA + ϕB− ϕC− ϕD
2 , (4)
where x represents the length signal in units of the
laser wavelength, and α, β, reduced to the range
−0.5 cycles≤ α, β≤ +0.5 cycles, represent the horizontal and
vertical tilt angles between the wavefronts, scaled by a huge
factor that depends on the beam geometry [24]. One more in-
dependent linear combination of the segment phases can be
3
PIR
LUT
PIR
LUT
PIR
LUT
PIR
LUT
PAPAPAPA
EBEA EC ED
ϕA
ᵠA ᵠB ᵠC ᵠD
ϕB ϕC ϕD
ADC A ADC B ADC C ADC D
x α β ε
Mixing
matrix
FIG. 3. Conventional readout scheme for a quadrant photodiode.
Each DPLL processes 1/4 of the total signal power which neverthe-
less has the full dynamics and noise of the length signal.
formed, which we call the ellipticity. It is rarely used but we
include it here in anticipation of the next steps:
ε = ϕA− ϕB− ϕC + ϕD
2 , (5)
The realization of this scheme is illustrated in Figure 3.
Combining the signals according to Equations (2). . . (4) is
not the only possibility [25]. In the LISA Pathﬁnder mis-
sion [1, 4, 18], for example, x was computed as the argument
of a complex vector formed by adding the complex ampli-
tudes from the four segments. This di ﬀers from Equation (2)
in that the segment contributions are weighted with their re-
spective beatnote amplitude. It is still a subject of investiga-
tion which of these methods is preferable with respect to, e.g.,
tilt-to-length cross-coupling. If the segment amplitudes are,
however, also measured with the ‘I’ branch of the DPLL and
recorded, the results can be converted into each other in post-
processing.
This standard scheme has been successfully used in many
applications, notably for the continuous active beam pointing
over 200 km separation of the inter-satellite interferometer in
the LRI on GRACE Follow-On [16]. There, and in other ap-
plications such as LISA, it is, however, not an optimal method:
• The beam divergence over the long distance together
with the ﬁnite aperture of the receiving telescope results
in a received beam with extremely low power (in the
order of 100 pW to a few nW), and consequently in
poor Signal-to-Noise ratio in the heterodyne beatnote
to be tracked, which limits the achievable robustness of
the tracking loops, each of which uses only 1 /4 of the
total signal power.
• The length signal x has a much higher dynamic range
than the angular signals. The former contains the
Doppler shift due to the relative spacecraft motion (typ-
ically moving at speeds of around some meters per sec-
ond, corresponding to some MHz Doppler shifts for a
wavelength of about 1 µm), as well as common-mode
noise sources such as laser frequency noise, which
largely cancel in the other three angular signals α, β
and ε.
• Nevertheless each of the four standard tracking loops
contains the full length signal which sets stringent re-
quirements on their loop bandwidths. The resulting
open-loop gains are in general not optimal for the much
quieter angular signals. The same holds for the 2 f ﬁl-
ters.
• The integer number of cycles, which physically exists
only once for each pair of interfering beams, is repre-
sented four times in ΦA . . .ΦD. They should represent
the same number of integer cycles and di ﬀer only by
the small quantities α, β and ε. If, however, a cycle slip
occurs in only some of the four segments, the length
signal x computed by Equation (2) is easily messed up,
and therefore the measurement degraded.
IV . ALTERNA TIVE ARCHITECTURE FOR TRACKING
LENGTH AND DWS SIGNALS WITH DPLL
PHASEMETERS
In order to overcome the above limitations, we propose here
an alternative loop topology, where the four servo loops do not
act on the four segments, but on x, α, β and ε instead. Error
signals for these loops can be obtained from Equations similar
to (2) to (5):
Ex = EA + EB + EC + ED
4 , (6)
Eα = EA− EB + EC− ED
2 , (7)
Eβ = EA + EB− EC− ED
2 , (8)
Eε = EA− EB− EC + ED
2 . (9)
The ﬁnal registers of the four loops track x, α, β and ε, which
directly represent the desired ﬁnal output of the phasemeter.
The segment phases, which are still needed for the multiplica-
tive phase detectors, can be easily obtained by inverting Equa-
4
tions (2) to (5):
ϕA = x + α + β + ε
2 , (10)
ϕB = x +−α + β− ε
2 , (11)
ϕC = x + α− β− ε
2 , (12)
ϕD = x +−α− β + ε
2 , (13)
where only the fractional part of x needs to be used and the
results are reduced to the range 0 . . .1 cycles. The realization
of this scheme is illustrated in Figure 4.
Only Ex carries the burden of the large dynamic range of the
length signal, e.g., due to the Doppler eﬀect in the orbital mo-
tion. It uses the combined signal from all four segments, each
of which has been coherently demodulated with individually
optimized phases. For noise sources that are uncorrelated
among QPD segments, such as shot noise or electronic noise,
this yields a 6 dB improvement in the SNR, which makes the
loop more robust against cycle slips. Now there is only one
full NCO in the system, which produces the phase ramp Φ
and its sawtooth-like fractional part ϕ, and in particular only
one register Φ that keeps track of the integer number of cy-
cles, which better maps the physical reality than having four
registers ΦA . . .ΦD.
The signals in Eα, Eβ and Eε, on the other hand, have
a much smaller dynamic range, since both the length sig-
nal as well as many correlated noise contributions, such as
laser frequency noise or residual intensity noise, largely can-
cel out. Moreover, angular degrees of freedom typically
change much slower than, e.g., spacecraft separation in ap-
plications such as the LISA mission or the GRACE Follow-
On mission. The outputs of their servo loops are slowly
varying numbers with a range that can be limited to e.g.
−0.5 cycles≤ α, β, ε≤ +0.5 cycles. If physical constraints ex-
ist, e.g. from the optical layout, that further limit their actually
achievable range, such constraints can easily be implemented
by restricting the range of values that the respective registers
are allowed to assume, further increasing the robustness. In
particular the ellipticity ε will be almost constant in many
cases, since it mainly depends on geometrical imperfections
of the laser beams.
Each loop can now be individually optimized for the dy-
namical behaviour and noise characteristics of the correspond-
ing signal. This concerns not only the servo loop bandwidths,
but also the 2 f ﬁlters, which can now be made more eﬃcient
for the α, β and ε loops.
Going one step further, one could even think of using an
optimized Kalman-type estimator for α, β and ϵ instead of a
simple PI controller. The angles α and β typically represent
pitch and yaw of either the spacecraft or a testmass, and their
dynamics consists of noise and commanded actuator signals.
The latter are known and could even be used in a feedforward
path to further reduce the burden on these ﬁlters.
At ﬁrst glance it may seem that this optical readout system
could produce fundamentally diﬀerent outputs, since the mix-
ᵠA ᵠB ᵠC ᵠD
LUTLUTLUTLUT EBEA EC ED
ADC A ADC B ADC C ADC D
PIR
ε register
β register
α registerPAx α β ε
Ex Eα Eβ Eε
Unmixing
matrix
Low 
dynamic
range
signals
FIG. 4. Proposed DPLL readout scheme for a quadrant photodiode.
The error signals from the four QPD segments EA . . . ED are used to
compute DWS error signalsEx . . . Eε. These are then fed to four ded-
icated DPLLs. The four outputs x . . . ε, now corresponding to phys-
ically meaningful observables, are then reverted back into the phase
signals ϕA . . . ϕD and used for closing the loop. Only one DPLL deals
with the length signal, while the the other three loops handle signals
of much smaller dynamic range (encircled). Each servo can hence be
individually tuned to the particular dynamical behavior of the signal
being tracked.
ing matrix that implements Equations (6). . . (9) acts on the er-
ror signals, which are weighted with the signal amplitudes in
the individual segments A. . . D, whereas Equations (2). . . (5)
act on the phases which have been stripped of the amplitude
information. Further analysis shows, however, that this is not
the case and that the proposed system produces the same out-
puts as the conventional one, at least if the servo loops have
enough gain and integrator stages to keep all error signals
close to zero. In that case, Equations (6). . . (9) imply that the
segment error signals EA . . . ED are zero as well, which leads
to the same outputs as in the conventional architecture.
The proposed architecture has been veriﬁed to produce
the same outputs as the conventional scheme by means of
computer simulations and electrical tests [26]. For example,
using a dynamical DPLL model implemented in MATLAB
Simulink we show that, in the absence of noise, and with
identical loop parameters, the conventional and the proposed
architectures are mathematically equivalent (Figure 5).
Initial tests of the proposed architecture using optical sig-
nals have been performed in a simple Mach-Zehnder Interfer-
ometer. The light sources were two Nd:Y AG NPRO lasers
5
Single-segment tracking
Combined-signal tracking
Input
Segment A
Segment B
Phase (rad)
−100
−50
0
50
100
Simulation time (s)
0 0.005 0.010
FIG. 5. Simulation of the conventional (single-segment tracking) and
the proposed (combined-signal tracking) diﬀerential wavefront sens-
ing architectures with DPLL readout, showing the successful track-
ing of two segments of a quadrant photodiode. Given the same input
with no noise, and identical loop parameters, the two architectures
produce the same output.
phase-locked to each other with 9 MHz o ﬀset with sepa-
rate electronics. The signals were recorded with an InGaAs
QPD of 1 mm diameter and were converted to voltages with
op-amp based transimpedance ampliﬁers with 20 MHz band-
width. The phasemeter operated at 80 MHz clock frequency
and used the hardware which is described in [17, Ch. 9]. Other
than implementing the mixing matrices shown in Figure 4,
the loop parameters were not changed between the conven-
tional and the proposed schemes. The initial measurements
conﬁrmed that the scheme works functionally and is able to
determine correct length and DWS signals. The length loop
in the proposed scheme can indeed handle signals of roughly
half the amplitude (−6 dB) compared to the standard scheme,
both in acquiring the signal and in tracking without cycle slip-
ping, when the artiﬁcially increased noise ﬂoor remains un-
changed, or with the same signal amplitude and 6 dB more
noise. Further experiments are being prepared using a LISA-
representative testbed [27].
V . NOISE INVESTIGA TIONS
We analyze the proposed technique in the context of a
heterodyne interferometer in the presence of relative inten-
sity noise (RIN) from the laser sources, which is uncorre-
lated among the interfering laser beams, but correlated among
QPD segments; and photon shot noise, which is uncorre-
lated among QPD segments. This analysis can be easily
scaled to include any number of correlated and uncorrelated
noise sources. Let P jk denote the optical power impinging
in segment k∈{ A, B, C, D} of the photodiode located in port
j∈{ A, B} of the interferometer consisting of a pair of QPDs
mounted at the output ports of a beam combiner (BS), and let
E1 and E2 denote the on-axis complex amplitudes of the in-
terfering ﬁelds (Figure 6). Upon combination, the superposed
ﬁelds have complex amplitudes given by
Port A : EA = ρE1 + τE2, (14)
Port B : EB = ρE1 + τeiπE2 = ρE1− τE2, (15)
where ρ and τ are the beamsplitter’s amplitude reﬂection and
transmission coeﬃcients respectively. The photodiode signal
in the quadrant labeled by{ j, k} ={port, segment} is given by
C jk = c jkP jk, where c jk is a constant determined by the analog
processing of the signal. The optical power P jk is calculated
as
P jk =
" ⏐⏐⏐E j
⏐⏐⏐2
dS jk, (16)
where dS jk is a surface element in segment k of the photodi-
ode in port j. For example, for a segment in port A we have
PAk =ρ2
"
|E1|2dS Ak + τ2
"
|E2|2dS Ak
+ ρτ
("
E1E∗
2dS Ak +
"
E∗
1E2dS Ak
)
. (17)
Here we introduce the deﬁnition of the overlap integral as
√η jkeiφ jk≡
!
E1E∗
2dS jk
(!
|E1|2dS jk
!
|E2|2dS jk
)1
2
, (18)
where η jk is the heterodyne eﬃciency and φ jk = 2π fhett−ψ jk is
the phase of the superposed optical ﬁelds, withfhet the hetero-
dyne frequency (i.e., the beatnote frequency between E1 and
E2), and ψ jk the interferometric phase. Recasting Equation 17
E2
E1
BS
Port A
Port B
ρE1−τE2
ρE1+τE2
AB
CD
Segments
QPD
FIG. 6. Diagram showing the interferometer being considered. E1
and E2 interfere at a beamsplitter (BS), and a quadrant photodiode is
placed at each of the output ports.
6
in terms of ηAk and φAk yields
PAk = 1
4
(
ρ2P1 + τ2P2 + ρτ
√
ηAkP1P2
[
eiφAk + e−iφAk
])
= 1
4
(
ρ2P1 + τ2P2 + 2ρτ
√
ηAkP1P2 cos φAk
)
, (19)
where P1 and P2 represent the instantaneous power in the in-
terfering beams, and we made the assumption that the beams
are well-centered in the detectors such that the power is
equally distributed over the four QPD segments. This is a rea-
sonable assumption for well aligned interferometers, as well
as for interferometers employing imaging systems to mini-
mize beam walk at the detectors. RIN is a multiplicative noise
source, and it can be modeled as
P1 = ¯P1 + δP1 = ¯P1(1 + r1), (20)
P2 = ¯P2 + δP2 = ¯P2(1 + r2), (21)
where ¯P1 and ¯P2 represent the average power in the interfering
ﬁelds, and RIN is deﬁned as the power noise normalized to
the average power, ri = δPi/ ¯Pi with i ={1, 2}. By making the
appropriate substitutions in Equation 19, we obtain
PAk = 1
4 ρ2 ¯P1(1 + r1) + 1
4 τ2 ¯P2(1 + r2)
+ 1
2 ρτ
√
ηAk ¯P1 ¯P2(1 + r1)(1 + r2) cosφAk,
≈ 1
4
(
ρ2 ¯P1 + τ2 ¯P2 + ρ2 ¯P1r1 + τ2 ¯P2r2
)
+ 1
2 ρτ
(
1 + r1 + r2
2
) √
ηAk ¯P1 ¯P2 cos φAk (22)
where we have used
√
1 + r≈ 1 + r/2, and we have neglected
the small cross term r1r2. The term 1
4(ρ2 ¯P1 + τ2 ¯P2) is the
DC coupling, and the term 1
4(ρ2 ¯P1r1 + τ2 ¯P2r2) is known as
1 f -RIN and is additive noise. The beatnote signal is mixed
with 2 f -RIN proportional to ( r1 + r2)/2. The 2 f -RIN cou-
pling to the interferometric phase is independent of the beam
powers and the heterodyne e ﬃciency, and it is maximum for
¯P1 = ¯P2, where the 2 f -RIN coupling is 1 /2 that of the
corresponding 1 f -RIN coupling. Since the total RIN cou-
pling is the root sum square of the two contributions, neglect-
ing 2 f -RIN induces only a small relative error of maximum
1− 1/
√
1 + (1/2)2≈ 10%, which becomes much less signif-
icant if the beams have di ﬀerent power (e.g., it is less than
3% for ¯P1/ ¯P2 = 10). To simplify our analysis, we disregard
this small term. The photodiode segment signals can then be
written as the combination of three terms,
C jk = c jkP jk = DC jk + r jk + b jk, (23)
where DC jk is the DC coupling of segment k in port j, r jk
is the 1 f -RIN coupling, and b jk is the beatnote signal. For
example, for port A,
DCAk = 1
4 cAk
(
ρ2 ¯P1 + τ2 ¯P2
)
, (24)
rAk = 1
4 cAk
(
ρ2 ¯P1r1 + τ2 ¯P2r2
)
, (25)
b jk = 1
2 ρτc jk
√
η jk ¯P1 ¯P2 cos φ jk. (26)
To characterize the resulting interferometric phase error, we
calculate the inverse carrier-to-noise density
˜ψ jk = Noise ASD in C jk
Signal RMS in C jk
=
˜∆C jk
RMS
{
b jk
} , (27)
where ˜ψ jk denotes the amplitude spectral density (ASD) of
the interferometric phase, RMS{b jk} is the root mean square
(RMS) of the beatnote signal, and ˜∆C jk is the ASD of the
noise in the photodiode segment signal,
˜∆C jk =
√
˜s2
jk + ˜r2
jk, (28)
where ˜s jk is the ASD of the shot noise coupling, and ˜r jk is the
ASD of the 1 f -RIN coupling. Shot noise of the photodetec-
tion is white noise aﬀecting all frequencies, and typically it is
the limiting noise source at high frequency. The ASD of shot
noise is given for each detector segment as
˜s jk =
√
2qeDC jk, (29)
where qe is the electron charge. Shot noise adds quadratically
with 1 f -RIN to the total phase noise. The 1 f -RIN coupling
ASD for a segment in port A is given by
˜rAk = 1
4 cAk
(
ρ2 ¯P1˜r1 + τ2 ¯P2˜r2
)
. (30)
The addition in Equation 30 is performed linearly if the RIN
in E1 and E2 is correlated, and quadratically otherwise. The
RMS value of the signal is
RMS
{
b jk
}
= 1
4 ρτc jk
√
2η jk ¯P1 ¯P2, (31)
where we have used the deﬁnition of the RMS value of a func-
tion of period T,
RMS{ f (t)} =
√
1
T
∫ T
0
[ f (t)]2 dt. (32)
The phase noise for a segment in port A considering 1 f -RIN
coupling only is given by
˜ψAk = ρ2 ¯P1˜r1 + τ2 ¯P2˜r2
ρτ
√
2ηAk ¯P1 ¯P2
. (33)
7
The phase noise due to shot noise only is given by
˜ψAk = 2
ρτ
√
qe
(
ρ2 ¯P1 + τ2 ¯P2
)
cAkηAk ¯P1 ¯P2
. (34)
Each QPD segment “sees” 1 /4 of the signal, and 1 /4 of the
1 f -RIN, and hence has the same phase error associated with
1 f -RIN coupling as a single element photodiode (SEPD) with
four times the surface area. However, each segment sees up to
1/2 of the shot noise as the SEPD, resulting in up to twice the
phase error associated with shot noise, or with any source of
noise that is uncorrelated among segments, as the SEPD. The
total phase noise in port A of the interferometer is given by
˜ψAk =
√
˜s2
Ak + ˜r2
Ak
1
4 ρτcAk
√
2ηAk ¯P1 ¯P2
, (35)
where we have assumed that the RIN noise in E1 and E2 is
uncorrelated, so that ˜r1 and ˜r2 add quadratically. In the con-
ventional DWS architecture, the PLL acts on the signals C jk
of the individual QPD segments, and thus the performance is
limited by the phase noise given in Equation 35. In the pro-
posed DWS architecture, the C jk signals are ﬁrst combined
linearly, and the PLL acts on the linear combinations. The
shot noise is uncorrelated among segments and adds quadrat-
ically, whereas 1f -RIN is correlated and adds linearly.
For example, for tracking the length signal, we combine the
four QPD quadrants in port A as
CA(A+B+C+D) =
D∑
k=A
CAk =
D∑
k=A
DCAk +
D∑
k=A
rAk +
D∑
k=A
bAk. (36)
We omit the factor 1 /4 in the signal combination (see Equa-
tion 6), since it a ﬀects equally the noise ASD and the beat-
note signal RMS of the combined signal, and therefore has
no impact on the SNR of the tracked signal. Note that in this
case the PLL does not track the phase of the beatnote signal
EA = ρE1 + τE2, but instead tracks the phase of the beatnote
signal that results from adding the four QPD segments A, B,
C, and D. The noise ASD of the combined signal is given by
˜∆CA(A+B+C+D) =

D∑
k=A
˜s2
Ak +

D∑
k=A
˜rAk

2
1
2
, (37)
and the RMS value of the signal is given by
RMS

D∑
k=A
bAk
 = ρτ
√¯P1 ¯P2
2
√
2

D∑
k1,k2=A
cAk1 cAk2
√ηAk1 ηAk2

1
2
= ρτ
√¯P1 ¯P2
2
√
2

D∑
k=A
c2
AkηAk + 2
∑
A≤k1<k2≤D
cAk1 cAk2
√ηAk1 ηAk2

1
2
. (38)
where k1, k2∈{A, B, C, D}. Equations 37 and 38 can be sub-
stituted into Equation 27 to obtain the total noise of the com-
bined signal of the four QPD segments. The resulting expres-
sion is quite long. By assuming identical analog signal pro-
cessing cAk1 = cAk2 = cA, and segment heterodyne eﬃciencies
ηAk1 = ηAk2 = ηA, we obtain the much simpler expression
˜EA(A+B+C+D)≈ 1
ρτ
√
2qe(ρ2 ¯P1 + τ2 ¯P2) + cA(ρ4 ¯P2
1˜r2
1 + τ4 ¯P2˜r2
2)
2cAηA ¯P1 ¯P2
.
(39)
The combined signal has the same level of 1 f -RIN coupling
as in the single-segment case (Equation 33), but lower shot
noise coupling. Shot noise in Equation 39 is 1 /2 that of the
single-segment case (Equation 34).
Equation 35 (i.e., the phase noise in single-segment track-
ing) and Equation 39 can be compared to assess the improve-
ment of the proposed technique:
˜EA(A+B+C+D)
˜ψAA
≈
√
1−
12qe
(¯P1 + ¯P2
)
16qe
(¯P1 + ¯P2
)
+ cA
(¯P2
1˜r2
1 + ¯P2
2˜r2
2
).
(40)
It can now be readily seen that the proposed technique pro-
vides a maximum improvement of 6 dB over the traditional
scheme,
20· log

˜EA(A+B+C+D)
˜ψAA
≈ 20· log

√
1− 3
4
≈− 6 dB. (41)
When tracking the interferometric phase signal from a single
segment of a QPD, the PLL “sees” 1 /4 of the signal RMS,
and 1/4 of the 1 f -RIN, but up to 1 /2 of the shot noise, as a
SEPD. This results in up to twice the shot noise induced phase
error as when tracking the phase signal of the SEPD. To take
full advantage of the QPD, in the proposed architecture the
PLL is applied not to the individual QPD segments, but to the
linear combinations of these signals (Equations 6-9). In this
way, the tracked signals will have the same level of correlated
noise coupling such as 1 f -RIN as in single-segment tracking,
but up to 2 times less uncorrelated noise coupling, such as
shot noise, resulting in an overall similar noise performance
as when tracking the signal from a SEPD of the same size as
the QPD. This is in addition to other advantages such as being
able to adjust the loop gains and ﬁlter parameters individually
for length and angular signals.
In the LISA long-arm interferometer, one ﬁeld is much
stronger than the other. In this case we may simplify further
8
P1 = 5.19×10−10 W
P2 = 0.003 W
r1 = 3×10−8 Hz-1/2
20·log10 [ΨAA / EA(A+B+C+D) ] (dB)
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
r2 (Hz-1/2)
10−10 10−9 10−8 10−7 10−6
FIG. 7. Improvement of the proposed scheme over single-segment
tracking as a function of the RIN level in the strong ﬁeld, for an
interferometer resembling the LISA long-arm interferometer.
(i.e., ¯P2≫ ¯P1, ¯P2
2˜r2
2≫ ¯P2
1˜r2
1),
˜EA(A+B+C+D)
˜ψAA
≈
√
1− 12qe ¯P2
16qe ¯P2 + ca ¯P2
2˜r2
2
. (42)
Figure 7 shows the improvement as a function of the RIN level
in the strong ﬁeld in an interferometer with parameters akin to
the LISA long-arm interferometer.
A major advantage of the increased SNR in the proposed
architecture is the enhanced robustness against alignment er-
rors of the interferometer. This is an issue of great concern in
the development of long-baseline space-based observatories,
such as LISA, where the unavoidable angular motion of the
spacecraft translates into alignment jitter in the interferome-
ter, and therefore in a degradation of heterodyne e ﬃciency
and a cross-coupling in the longitudinal pathlength measure-
ments known as tilt-to-length (TTL) coupling. Imaging sys-
tems can be used to reduce TTL-coupling in the interferome-
ter to a great extent [27, 28]. The imaging systems suppress
beam walk in the detector plane, thus leading to the reduction
in TTL-coupling, but in turn they magnify the beam tilt an-
gle. The angular magniﬁcation provided by the imaging sys-
tems, in conjunction with the one provided by the receiving
telescope, means that the phasemeter should be able to track
signals with relatively poor heterodyne eﬃciency.
To quantify the improvement of the proposed technique un-
der alignment errors of the interferometer, we develop a com-
puter model of the interferometer using Ifocad. Ifocad is a col-
lection of C++ libraries that provides proven methods for sim-
ulating two-beam laser interferometers [24, 29]. We simulate
the interference between a Gaussian reference beam with typ-
ical parameters (LO beam), and a Gaussian beam with a very
large waist located at the position of a QPD such that, at this
Single-segment tracking
Combined-signal tracking
Inverted C/N density (dBHz)
−95
−90
−85
−80
−75
−70
θ  (μrad)
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
FIG. 8. Inverted carrier-to-noise density of the signals being tracked
by the PLL in the conventional (single-segment tracking) and the
proposed (combined-signal tracking) architectures, resulting from a
Monte-Carlo simulation of a misaligned interferometer where the
beam tilt angle, as sensed by the detector, is sampled from a uniform
distribution with amplitude θ, and the beam tilt direction is sampled
from a uniform distribution spanning the entire plane transverse to
the optical axis. The beam tilts with respect to the center of the de-
tector as if it were being imaged to that point by an imaging system.
In single-segment tracking, all four QPD segments are taken into
consideration in the statistical analysis. The solid lines represent the
maxima and minima of the resulting inverted C /N density distribu-
tions. The dark-shade regions delimited by dashed lines represent
one standard deviation from the mean.
TABLE I. Simulation parameters. The model assumes identical ana-
log processing of the QPD segments.
Property Value
¯P1 519 pW
¯P2 3 mW
˜r1 10−8/
√
Hz
˜r2 10−8/
√
Hz
ρ = τ 1/
√
2
QPD active area diameter 1 mm
QPD slit width 20 µm
Reference beam waist radius 0.5 mm
Measurement beam waist radius 10 mm
position, it resembles the ﬂat-top beam received by a LISA
spacecraft (Rx beam). This particular simulation method has
been veriﬁed experimentally in a testbed featuring ﬂat-top
beam on Gaussian beam interference [27].
We perform a Monte-Carlo analysis in which the program
computes the heterodyne eﬃciencies for each of the four seg-
ments of the QPD, as the Rx beam is rotated with respect
to the center of the detector, so as to mimic the e ﬀect of an
9
imaging system that has been aligned perfectly and is there-
fore suppressing the Rx beam walk in the detector plane. The
beam tilt angle is sampled from a uniform distribution with
increasing amplitude, and the tilt direction is sampled from
a uniform distribution spanning the entire plane transverse to
the optical axis. The program then uses the computed het-
erodyne eﬃciencies to calculate the estimated signal error in
the conventional (single-segment tracking, Equation 35) and
the proposed (combined-signal tracking, Equations 38 and 37)
architectures. The simulation parameters are gathered in Ta-
ble I.
As expected, the proposed technique oﬀers improved SNR
throughout the tilt range (Figure 8). It is therefore able to
handle worse absolute beam misalignments and higher resid-
ual beam pointing jitter. This improvement is crucial for a
enhanced tolerance of spacecraft attitude control instabilities
prior to acquiring a stable phase locking of a slave laser to
a weak received beam, as required for the establishment of
an inter-spacecraft laser link in a laser transponder conﬁgura-
tion. This improved SNR is then specially relevant through-
out the initial beatnote acquisition states and re-acquisition
sequences [30, 31], providing more robust control loops for
sensing the optical link dynamics.
It is important to note that the noise improvement is
achieved in the signals being tracked by each separate PLL
instance, and not on the length and angular signals. In the con-
ventional scheme, the individual QPD segment signals tracked
by four PLLs are combined in the next stage to yield length
and angular signals with the same level of noise as in the pro-
posed scheme. The advantage of the proposed architecture
lies in the enhancement of the tracking loops: the PLLs track
signals with greater SNR, which results in more robust locks
with lower probability of cycle slipping, and the added beneﬁt
of being able to tune each PLL instance to optimally track its
corresponding length or angular signal channel.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a scheme to process the heterodyne beat-
notes from the four segments of a quadrant photodiode in het-
erodyne interferometers that use DPLL-based phasemeters. It
acts on the length signal x and angular signals α, β and ε,
which directly correspond to physically meaningful parame-
ters. The proposed scheme has advantages in terms of robust-
ness against cycle slips. It allows to individually optimize the
loop gains and ﬁlter parameters for length and angular signals,
which may also lead to lower noise in these outputs. A noise
analysis of the proposed architecture has been carried out in
the context of a heterodyne interferometer in the presence
of shot noise and relative intensity noise. Then, a computer
model was used to analyze the degradation of the tracked sig-
nals in a misaligned interferometer. The proposed technique
has been compared against the conventional one to demon-
strate a maximum improvement of 6 dB. We expect that this
scheme may be an attractive alternative for applications like
LISA or future GRACE Follow-On-like geodesy missions. It
can also ﬁnd applications across multiple disciplines where
high precision length and angular measurements are desired,
notably in inertial sensing of test masses, with applications in
ﬁelds such as vibration isolation [32], and tests of fundamen-
tal physics [33–35].
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the support of the German Space
Agency, DLR (FKZ 50OQ1801); Clusters of Excellence
“QuantumFrontiers: Light and Matter at the Quantum Fron-
tier: Foundations and Applications in Metrology” (EXC-
2123, project number: 390837967); PhoenixD: “Photon-
ics, Optics, and Engineering—Innovation Across Disciplines”
(EXC-2122, project number: 390833453).
VIII. REFERENCES
[1] M. Armano, H. Audley, J. Baird, P. Binetruy, M. Born, D. Bor-
toluzzi, E. Castelli, A. Cavalleri, A. Cesarini, A. M. Cruise,
K. Danzmann, M. de Deus Silva, I. Diepholz, G. Dixon,
R. Dolesi, L. Ferraioli, V . Ferroni, E. D. Fitzsimons, M. Fres-
chi, L. Gesa, F. Gibert, D. Giardini, R. Giusteri, C. Gri-
mani, J. Grzymisch, I. Harrison, G. Heinzel, M. Hewitson,
D. Hollington, D. Hoyland, M. Hueller, H. Inchauspe, O. Jen-
nrich, P. Jetzer, N. Karnesis, B. Kaune, N. Korsakova, C. J.
Killow, J. A. Lobo, I. Lloro, L. Liu, J. P. Lopez-Zaragoza,
R. Maarschalkerweerd, D. Mance, N. Meshksar, V . Mar-
tin, L. Martin-Polo, J. Martino, F. Martin-Porqueras, I. Ma-
teos, P. W. McNamara, J. Mendes, L. Mendes, M. Nofrarias,
S. Paczkowski, M. Perreur-Lloyd, A. Petiteau, P. Pivato,
E. Plagnol, J. Ramos-Castro, J. Reiche, D. I. Robertson, F. Ri-
vas, G. Russano, J. Slutsky, C. F. Sopuerta, T. Sumner, D. Tex-
ier, J. I. Thorpe, D. Vetrugno, S. Vitale, G. Wanner, H. Ward,
P. J. Wass, W. J. Weber, L. Wissel, A. Wittchen, and P. Zweifel,
“Beyond the required lisa free-fall performance: New lisa
pathﬁnder results down to 20 µhz,” Physical Review Letters
120, 10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.061101.
[2] Klaus Abich, Alexander Abramovici, Bengie Amparan, An-
dreas Baatzsch, Brian Bachman Okihiro, David C. Barr,
Maxime P. Bize, Christina Bogan, Claus Braxmaier, Michael J.
Burke, Ken C. Clark, Christian Dahl, Katrin Dahl, Karsten
Danzmann, Mike A. Davis, Glenn de Vine, Je ﬀrey A. Dick-
son, Serge Dubovitsky, Andreas Eckardt, Thomas Ester,
Germ´an Fern´andez Barranco, Reinhold Flatscher, Frank Flecht-
ner, William M. Folkner, Samuel Francis, Martin S. Gilbert,
10
Frank Gilles, Martin Gohlke, Nicolas Grossard, Burghardt
Guenther, Philipp Hager, Jerome Hauden, Frank Heine, Ger-
hard Heinzel, Mark Herding, Martin Hinz, James Howell,
Mark Katsumura, Marina Kaufer, William Klipstein, Alexan-
der Koch, Micah Kruger, Kameron Larsen, Anton Lebeda,
Arnold Lebeda, Thomas Leikert, Carl Christian Liebe, Je-
hhal Liu, Lynette Lobmeyer, Christoph Mahrdt, Thomas Man-
goldt, Kirk McKenzie, Malte Misfeldt, Phillip R. Morton, Vitali
M¨uller, Alexander T. Murray, Don J. Nguyen, Kolja Nicklaus,
Robert Pierce, Joshua A. Ravich, Gretchen Reavis, Jens Re-
iche, Josep Sanjuan, Daniel Sch ¨utze, Christoph Seiter, Daniel
Shaddock, Benjamin Sheard, Michael Sileo, Robert Spero,
Gary Spiers, Gunnar Stede, Michelle Stephens, Andrew Sutton,
Joseph Trinh, Kai V oss, Duo Wang, Rabi T. Wang, Brent Ware,
Henry Wegener, Steve Windisch, Christopher Woodruﬀ, Bernd
Zender, and Marcus Zimmermann, “In-orbit performance of
the grace follow-on laser ranging interferometer,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 123, 031101 (2019).
[3] A. M. Cruise, D. Hoyland, and S. M. Aston, “Implementation
of the phasemeter for lisa ltp,” Classical and Quantum Gravity
22, S165–S169 (2005).
[4] G. Heinzel, V . Wand, A. Garcia, O. P. Jennrich, C. Brax-
maier, D. Robertson, K. Middleton, D. Hoyland, A. Rudiger,
R. Schilling, U. Johann, and K. Danzmann, “The ltp inter-
ferometer and phasemeter,” Classical and Quantum Gravity21,
S581–S587 (2004).
[5] Yu-Rong Liang, Hui-Zong Duan, Hsien-Chi Yeh, and Jun Luo,
“Fundamental limits on the digital phase measurement method
based on cross-correlation analysis,” Review of Scientiﬁc In-
struments 83 (2012), 10.1063/1.4751867.
[6] S. E. Pollack and R. T. Stebbins, “Demonstration of the zero-
crossing phasemeter with a lisa test-bed interferometer,” Clas-
sical and Quantum Gravity 23, 4189–4200 (2006).
[7] Vinzenz Wand, Felipe Guzman, Gerhard Heinzel, and Karsten
Danzmann, “Lisa phasemeter development,” in Laser Interfer-
ometer Space Antenna, AIP Conference Proceedings, V ol. 873,
edited by S. M. Merkowitz and J. C. Livas (2006) pp. 689–+.
[8] D. Shaddock, B. Ware, P. G. Halverson, R. E. Spero, and
B. Klipstein, “Overview of the lisa phasemeter,” in Laser In-
terferometer Space Antenna, AIP Conference Proceedings, V ol.
873, edited by S. M. Merkowitz and J. C. Livas (2006) pp. 654–
+.
[9] Malcolm B. Gray, Terry McRae, Magnus T. L. Hsu, Jan Her-
rmann, and Daniel A. Shaddock, “A digital phasemeter for
precision length measurements,” in 2012 Conference on Lasers
and Electro-Optics, Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics
(2012).
[10] Oliver Gerberding, Benjamin Sheard, Iouri Bykov, Joachim
Kullmann, Juan Jose Esteban Delgado, Karsten Danzmann,
and Gerhard Heinzel, “Phasemeter core for intersatellite
laser heterodyne interferometry: modelling, simulations and
experiments,” Classical and Quantum Gravity 30 (2013),
10.1088/0264-9381/30/23/235029.
[11] Samuel P. Francis, Timothy T. Y . Lam, Kirk McKenzie, An-
drew J. Sutton, Robert L. Ward, David E. McClelland, and
Daniel A. Shaddock, “Weak-light phase tracking with a low cy-
cle slip rate,” Optics Letters 39, 5251–5254 (2014).
[12] B. Bachman, G. de Vine, J. Dickson, S. Dubovitsky, J. Liu,
W. Klipstein, K. McKenzie, R. Spero, A. Sutton, B. Ware, and
C. Woodruﬀ, “Flight phasemeter on the laser ranging interfer-
ometer on the grace follow-on mission,” in 11th International
LISA Symposium , Journal of Physics Conference Series, V ol.
840 (2017).
[13] Karsten Danzmann, Lisa Pathﬁnder Team, and eLisa Consor-
tium, “Lisa and its pathﬁnder,” Nature Physics 11, 613–615
(2015).
[14] “LISA mission L3 proposal,” .
[15] B. S. Sheard, G. Heinzel, K. Danzmann, D. A. Shaddock, W. M.
Klipstein, and W. M. Folkner, “Intersatellite laser ranging in-
strument for the grace follow-on mission,” Journal of Geodesy
86, 1083–1095 (2012).
[16] “Joint press release by AEI and NASA /JPL, July 02, 2018; pa-
per in preparation,”.
[17] Oliver Gerberding, Phase readout for satellite interferometry ,
Ph.D. thesis, Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover (2014).
[18] M. Armano, H. Audley, G. Auger, J. T. Baird, M. Bassan, P. Bi-
netruy, M. Born, D. Bortoluzzi, N. Brandt, M. Caleno, L. Car-
bone, A. Cavalleri, A. Cesarini, G. Ciani, G. Congedo, A. M.
Cruise, K. Danzmann, M. de Deus Silva, R. De Rosa, M. Diaz-
Aguilo, L. Di Fiore, I. Diepholz, G. Dixon, R. Dolesi, N. Dun-
bar, L. Ferraioli, V . Ferroni, W. Fichter, E. D. Fitzsimons,
R. Flatscher, M. Freschi, A. F. Garcia Marin, C. Garcia Marir-
rodriga, R. Gerndt, L. Gesa, F. Gibert, D. Giardini, R. Giusteri,
F. Guzman, A. Grado, C. Grimani, A. Grynagier, J. Grzymisch,
I. Harrison, G. Heinzel, M. Hewitson, D. Hollington, D. Hoy-
land, M. Hueller, H. Inchauspe, O. Jennrich, P. Jetzer, U. Jo-
hann, B. Johlander, N. Karnesis, B. Kaune, N. Korsakova, C. J.
Killow, J. A. Lobo, I. Lloro, L. Liu, J. P. Lopez-Zaragoza,
R. Maarschalkerweerd, D. Mance, V . Martin, L. Martin-Polo,
J. Martino, F. Martin-Porqueras, S. Madden, I. Mateos, P. W.
McNamara, J. Mendes, L. Mendes, A. Monsky, D. Nicolodi,
M. Nofrarias, S. Paczkowski, M. Perreur-Lloyd, A. Petiteau,
P. Pivato, E. Plagnol, P. Prat, U. Ragnit, B. Rais, J. Ramos-
Castro, J. Reiche, D. I. Robertson, H. Rozemeijer, F. Rivas,
G. Russano, J. Sanjuan, P. Sarra, A. Schleicher, D. Shaul,
J. Slutsky, C. F. Sopuerta, R. Stanga, F. Steier, T. Sumner,
D. Texier, et al. , “Sub-femto-g free fall for space-based grav-
itational wave observatories: Lisa pathﬁnder results,” Physical
Review Letters 116 (2016), 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.231101.
[19] M. Armano, H. Audley, J. Baird, P. Binetruy, M. Born, D. Bor-
toluzzi, E. Castelli, A. Cavalleri, A. Cesarini, A. M. Cruise,
K. Danzmann, M. de Deus Silva, I. Diepholz, G. Dixon,
R. Dolesi, L. Ferraioli, V . Ferroni, E. D. Fitzsimons, M. Fres-
chi, L. Gesa, F. Gibert, D. Giardini, R. Giusteri, C. Gri-
mani, J. Grzymisch, I. Harrison, G. Heinzel, M. Hewitson,
D. Hollington, D. Hoyland, M. Hueller, H. Inchausp ´e, O. Jen-
nrich, P. Jetzer, N. Karnesis, B. Kaune, N. Korsakova, C. J.
Killow, J. A. Lobo, I. Lloro, L. Liu, J. P. L ´opez-Zaragoza,
R. Maarschalkerweerd, D. Mance, N. Meshksar, V . Mart ´ın,
L. Martin-Polo, J. Martino, F. Martin-Porqueras, I. Mateos,
P. W. McNamara, J. Mendes, L. Mendes, M. Nofrarias,
S. Paczkowski, M. Perreur-Lloyd, A. Petiteau, P. Pivato,
E. Plagnol, J. Ramos-Castro, J. Reiche, D. I. Robertson, F. Ri-
vas, G. Russano, J. Slutsky, C. F. Sopuerta, T. Sumner, D. Tex-
ier, J. I. Thorpe, D. Vetrugno, S. Vitale, G. Wanner, H. Ward,
P. J. Wass, W. J. Weber, L. Wissel, A. Wittchen, and P. Zweifel
(LISA Pathﬁnder Collaboration), “Lisa pathﬁnder platform sta-
bility and drag-free performance,” Phys. Rev. D 99, 082001
(2019).
[20] Alexander Koch, Josep Sanjuan, Martin Gohlke, Christoph
Mahrdt, Nils Brause, Claus Braxmaier, and Gerhard Heinzel,
“Line of sight calibration for the laser ranging interferometer
on-board the grace follow-on mission: on-ground experimental
validation,” Optics Express 26, 25892 (2018).
[21] E. Morrison, B. J. Meers, D. I. Robertson, and H. Ward, “Auto-
matic alignment of optical interferometers,” Applied Optics33,
5041–5049 (1994).
11
[22] E. Morrison, B. J. Meers, D. I. Robertson, and H. Ward, “Ex-
perimental demonstration of an automatic alignment system for
optical interferometers,” Applied Optics33, 5037–5040 (1994).
[23] Floyd M. Gardner, Phaselock Techniques (John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 2005).
[24] Gudrun Wanner, Gerhard Heinzel, Evgenia Kochkina,
Christoph Mahrdt, Benjamin S. Sheard, Soenke Schuster,
and Karsten Danzmann, “Methods for simulating the readout
of lengths and angles in laser interferometers with gaussian
beams,” Optics Communications 285, 4831–4839 (2012).
[25] Gudrun Wanner, Soenke Schuster, Michael Troebs, and Ger-
hard Heinzel, “A brief comparison of optical pathlength di ﬀer-
ence and various deﬁnitions for the interferometric phase,” in
10th International LISA Symposium , Journal of Physics Con-
ference Series, V ol. 610 (2015).
[26] Nils Christopher Brause, Auxiliary function development for the
LISA metrology system , Ph.D. thesis, Leibniz Universit ¨at Han-
nover (2018).
[27] M. Chwalla, K. Danzmann, M. Dovale ´Alvarez, J.J. Esteban
Delgado, G. Fern ´andez Barranco, E. Fitzsimons, O. Gerberd-
ing, G. Heinzel, C.J. Killow, M. Lieser, M. Perreur-Lloyd, D.I.
Robertson, J.M. Rohr, S. Schuster, T.S. Schwarze, M. Tr ¨obs,
G. Wanner, and H. Ward, “Optical suppression of tilt-to-length
coupling in the LISA long-arm interferometer,” Physical Re-
view Applied 14 (2020), 10.1103/physrevapplied.14.014030.
[28] M Tr ¨obs, S Schuster, M Lieser, M Zwetz, M Chwalla, K Danz-
mann, G Fern ´andez Barr´anco, E D Fitzsimons, O Gerberding,
G Heinzel, C J Killow, M Perreur-Lloyd, D I Robertson, T S
Schwarze, G Wanner, and H Ward, “Reducing tilt-to-length
coupling for the LISA test mass interferometer,” Classical and
Quantum Gravity 35, 105001–22 (2018).
[29] IfoCAD, “http: //www.lisa.aei-hannover.de/ifocad/,” .
[30] Danielle M. R. Wuchenich, Christoph Mahrdt, Benjamin S.
Sheard, Samuel P. Francis, Robert E. Spero, John Miller,
Conor M. Mow-Lowry, Robert L. Ward, William M. Klipstein,
Gerhard Heinzel, Karsten Danzmann, David E. McClelland,
and Daniel A. Shaddock, “Laser link acquisition demonstra-
tion for the grace follow-on mission,” Opt. Express 22, 11351–
11366 (2014).
[31] Alexander Koch, Link Acquisition and Optimization for Inter-
satellite Laser Interferometry, Ph.D. thesis, Leibniz Universit¨at
Hannover (2020).
[32] C M Mow-Lowry and D Martynov, “A 6d interferometric in-
ertial isolation system,” Classical and Quantum Gravity 36,
245006 (2019).
[33] S. Schlamminger, K.-Y . Choi, T. A. Wagner, J. H. Gundlach,
and E. G. Adelberger, “Test of the equivalence principle using a
rotating torsion balance,” Physical Review Letters 100 (2008),
10.1103/physrevlett.100.041101.
[34] Jun Luo, Qi Liu, Liang-Cheng Tu, Cheng-Gang Shao, Lin-
Xia Liu, Shan-Qing Yang, Qing Li, and Ya-Ting Zhang,
“Determination of the newtonian gravitational ConstantGwith
time-of-swing method,” Physical Review Letters 102 (2009),
10.1103/physrevlett.102.240801.
[35] Qing Li, Chao Xue, Jian-Ping Liu, Jun-Fei Wu, Shan-Qing
Yang, Cheng-Gang Shao, Li-Di Quan, Wen-Hai Tan, Liang-
Cheng Tu, Qi Liu, Hao Xu, Lin-Xia Liu, Qing-Lan Wang,
Zhong-Kun Hu, Ze-Bing Zhou, Peng-Shun Luo, Shu-Chao Wu,
Vadim Milyukov, and Jun Luo, “Measurements of the gravita-
tional constant using two independent methods,” Nature 560,
582–588 (2018).