1
Embedded digital phase noise analyzer
for optical frequency metrology
Simone Donadello ∗, Elio K. Bertacco, Davide Calonico and Cecilia Clivati
Abstract—Digital signal processing (DSP) is supporting novel
in-field applications of optical interferometry, such as in laser
ranging and distributed acoustic sensing. While the highest
performances are achieved with field-programmable gated ar-
rays (FPGAs), their complexity and cost are often too high
for many tasks. Here, we describe an alternative solution for
processing optical signals in real-time, based on a dual-core 32-bit
microcontroller. We implemented in-phase and quadrature (IQ)
demodulation of optical beat-notes resulting from the interference
of independent laser sources, phase noise analysis of deployed
optical fibers covering intercity distances, and synchronization
of remote acquisitions via optical trigger signals. The embedded
architecture can efficiently accomplish a large variety of tasks
in the context of optical signal processing, being also easily
configurable, compact and upgradable. These features make
it attractive for applications that require long-term, remotely-
operated, and field-deployed instrumentation.
Index Terms—Digital signal processing (DSP), embedded sys-
tem, frequency metrology, laser interferometry, lock-in amplifier,
optical fiber sensing, phase measurement.
I. I NTRODUCTION
I
N RECENT years, coherent optical technologies are finding
a growing number of applications outside the laboratories
where they were first developed: optical clocks emerged as
promising quantum sensors for probing the gravitational po-
tential [1], [2]; optically coherent frequency combs suitable
for in-field operation have been developed [3], with applica-
tions to environmental gas-sensing [4], high-resolution ranging
[5], [6], and transportable clock comparison [7]; coherent
interferometry of narrow-linewidth lasers on deployed optical
cables proved to be a powerful tool for the remote distributed
sensing of geophysical signals, opening new possibilities for
the study of Earth dynamics [8], [9], with prospects of a future
integration on data transmission networks [10], [11]; finally,
highly coherent laser sources in trusted communication nodes
could improve the performances of advanced, quantum-secure
communication protocols [12].
Many of these applications require high-resolution and
coherent measurements of the optical signal phase. While this
is an easy task in a laboratory equipped with commercial
instruments like frequency counters or phase noise analyzers,
the development of portable, reconfigurable, and scalable mea-
surement setups equipped with remote control and alert sys-
tems is critical for in-field applications. Digital electronics and
software-defined radio (SDR) greatly support this challenge,
The authors are with the Quantum Metrology and Nanotechnologies Divi-
sion, at INRIM – Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica, 10135 Torino,
Italy.
∗Corresponding author: Simone Donadello.
Published version DOI: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3288255
fulfilling sophisticated and time-critical tasks, and allowing
preliminary signal processing onboard, before relevant data are
transferred to remote control units at suitably reduced rates.
So far, custom platforms based on field-programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs) emerged as the best solutions for these tasks,
with many applications in the context of optical frequency
metrology [13], [14], [15]. Nevertheless, their high cost and the
complexity associated to the board configuration makes them
a not obvious nor optimal choice in many cases, especially
when compared to more affordable and practical architectures
[16], [17], [18].
Here we describe another approach, that makes use of
a microcontroller unit (MCU) to implement optical phase
measurements, based on the heterodyne demodulation scheme
inherited from digital lock-in amplifiers [19], [20], [21]. The
platform is based on the affordable yet high-performance
STM32H7 unit, with dual-core 32-bit ARM architecture and
integrated analog-to-digital converters (ADCs). Custom elec-
tronics and firmware were developed to realize a compact
low-cost phase noise analyzer, with reconfigurable bandwidth
and sampling rate. The optimized algorithm implements in-
phase and quadrature (IQ) phase detection. Carrier frequency
and amplitude of radio frequency (RF) signals can be mea-
sured with high-resolution, at output data rates up to 20 kHz.
The system is clocked with a stable quartz reference, and
it includes synthesizers, digital-to-analog converters (DACs)
and direct digital synthesizers (DDSs) for signal conditioning,
resulting in a fully-embedded stand-alone remote measurement
unit.
Important features have been developed for the realiza-
tion of long-term experiments with real-time acquisitions.
In particular, we focused on developing a platform suitable
for the frequency comparison of laser sources with spectral
separation up to a few gigahertz, possibly varying over time,
and the analysis of phase noise accumulated by a coherent
signal as it travels a long-haul fiber. We implemented routines
for synchronizing remote acquisitions within microseconds,
suppressing common-mode noise processes. Our digital signal
processing (DSP) solution addresses the typical challenges
encountered in the processing of coherent optical signals,
with proper handling of the amount of phase noise entering
the demodulation steps, and combining high data rates with
flexible and lightweight firmware algorithms.
II. S YSTEM ARCHITECTURE
A. Electronics and MCU
Our digital phase analyzer is implemented on a dual-core
MCU from the STM32 series (STM32H745, STMicroelectron-
ics), based on ARM Cortex central processing units (CPUs)
arXiv:2302.03599v2  [eess.SP]  5 Aug 2023
2
DMA
PLL
UARTSPI
shared memory
CPU2
ARM Cortex M4
peripheral management
CPU1
ARM Cortex M7
demodulation and DSP
DMA
240 MHz
480 MHz
4 MHz
microcontroller unit
DDS
synthesizer
1 MHz
OCXO
voltage
reference
ADC DAC
10 MHz
10 MHz
output data
and control 
ADC
500 MHz
DAC
OCXO adjust
input oﬀset
input
oﬀset
× 15
drift
correction
fdrift
mixer local oscillator fLO
fLO
low-
pass
35 MHz / 4 GHz
analog signal
clock signal
digital signal
input
RF signal
CRC
down-
conversion
mixer
ampliﬁcation stage
USB
Fig. 1. Scheme of the acquisition system based on a dual-core microcontroller and its peripherals; the main elements of the input signal conditioning stage
and other onboard components are also reported.
with M7 and M4 32-bit architectures (CPU1 and CPU2 re-
spectively). A custom printed circuit board (PCB) has been de-
signed as a shield for the MCU development board NUCLEO-
H745ZI-Q. The PCB includes the conditioning electronics for
the input analog signals, as well as all the components required
for the embedded system functioning. The electronic scheme
of the microcontroller with its internal and external peripherals
is sketched in Fig. 1.
The MCU includes 3 multi-channel ADCs, having 16-bit
nominal resolution and 12.2 effective number of bits (ENOB).
The input signal is acquired using a fast ADC channel operated
at 14-bit, which allows a maximum sampling rate of 5 MHz.
To match the input bandwidth requirements, the signal to
be measured is down-converted to the nominal frequency
ν0 = 1 MHz using an external frequency mixer in combination
with a low-pass filter (LPF) with 1.9 MHz cutoff. The RF
signal is amplified and brought to the ADC voltage range
of 0 V to 2.5 V using a bipolar operational amplifier in non-
inverting configuration (AD8027, Analog Devices), with fixed
gain 15, bandwidth from 0 MHz to 8 MHz, and configurable
voltage offset. This ADC input amplification scheme allows
to acquire signals with different polarizations and frequencies,
useful for debugging and general-purpose applications. For
instance, when the external mixer is removed, this scheme
also supports low-noise direct-coupling (DC) measurements.
The local oscillator (LO) signal for the frequency mixer
is either generated by an embedded synthesizer (ADF4351,
Analog Devices) in the range from 35 MHz to 4.4 GHz, or
by a DDS (AD9912, Analog Devices) whose frequency is
programmed with 48-bit resolution by the MCU via Serial
Peripheral Interface (SPI). This ensures on one side a broad-
band operating range for the input signal, and on the other
the possibility of slowly tracking its low-frequency drifts by
finely adjusting the DDS tuning word.
A 10 MHz oven-controlled crystal oscillator (OCXO) is
integrated on the custom shield as the master clock source
for the MCU and the other components. A good clock source
is crucial for a high-performance phase measurement system.
The chosen OCXO (HCD660/FTFN, Golledge) is character-
ized by 2 × 10−10 aging per day, short term stability better
than 1 × 10−12 (Allan deviation at 1 s), and phase noise lower
than −155 dBc/Hz above 1 kHz. The MCU clock signals
are generated from the 10 MHz reference using the internal
phase-locked loops (PLLs). These include the 480 MHz clock
of CPU1 and the 240 MHz clock for CPU2. A synchronous
4 MHz clock is generated by a MCU hardware timer, and used
to trigger the ADC acquisition. The synthesizer at the input
down-conversion stage is also referenced to the same OCXO,
while the DDS is clocked at 500 MHz by the synthesizer.
An external 10 MHz source can be provided for applications
demanding a common clock architecture or higher accuracy,
replacing the OCXO in all the above-mentioned tasks.
A 16-bit DAC (AD5686, Analog Devices) is used to gener-
ate the reconfigurable voltage offset for the signal conditioning
stage, and to fine-adjust the OCXO frequency through its ded-
icated tuning voltage input. The latter is used to compensate at
the sub-mHz level the OCXO frequency offset and the quartz
aging relatively to a reference oscillator.
The board is powered with ±15 V and cooled with forced
air flow. A low-noise precision voltage source at Vref = 2.5 V
(MAX6225-AE, Maxim Integrated) is used as analog reference
for the DAC and the MCU internal ADCs. Other sensors
can be connected to the MCU shield by means of SPI, such
as accelerometers and temperature sensors used to monitor
the measurement environment conditions. Additional ADC
channels can be used to acquire other experimental parameters
at lower frequencies.
The MCU firmware is programmed in C language, ex-
3
ploiting the STM32 HAL and Low-Layer libraries. The dual-
core architecture of the microcontroller is organized with
the high-speed CPU1 being used for the computationally-
demanding DSP operations to be performed in real-time.
These include ADC readout, IQ demodulation, digital filtering,
and decimation to lower sampling rates. The computational
cost is reduced by taking advantage of the direct memory
access interface (DMA) for data transfer between the inter-
nal peripherals, which can operate without consuming CPU
resources. Moreover, the data and instruction cache embedded
in the MCU, in conjunction with a careful optimization of
the firmware loops, reduces the memory access time while
processing data. Finally the 32-bit floating-point unit (FPU)
allows faster calculations, with many floating-point operations
being performed as single CPU cycles.
After decimation, the processed data are transferred to
CPU2 exploiting a shared memory region and hardware
semaphores. That secondary processor is dedicated to the
continuous data streaming toward a computer unit, used for
data storage. The connection is obtained with a universal
asynchronous receiver-transmitter (UART) serial interface via
Universal Serial Bus (USB) at 4 Mbit s−1 baud rate. Data
consistency is checked by means of the cyclic redundancy
check (CRC) internal peripheral. CPU2 is dedicated also to the
general system management: it parses the commands received
from the computer to configure and control the acquisition,
and it manages the external peripherals connected to the board
via SPI. Operation priorities are managed by means of MCU
hardware interrupts.
B. Digital signal processing
1) Phase demodulation: The input signal phase is pro-
cessed exploiting the IQ demodulation technique. This is
a common approach to phase detection in digital systems,
typically implemented on FPGAs to process the RF signals
acquired with fast ADCs [22], [23], [24]. However, some
algorithm optimizations have to be considered to maintain
good performances also on a resource-limited MCU such as
in our case [25], [26], [27], [28].
It is useful to first recap a few general concepts that will
help to illustrate our DSP operation. First, consider the general
case of a RF voltage signal V (t) at time t, characterized by
nominal frequency ν0, and time-varying amplitude As(t) and
phase ϕ(t), expressed as
V (t) = As(t) sin(2πν0t + ϕ(t)) . (1)
Time-dependent fluctuations of the signal phase give rise to
deviations of the instantaneous carrier frequency ν(t) from the
nominal value ν0, and are the primary information of interest
in our context, thus
∆ν(t) = ν(t) − ν0 = 1
2π
dϕ(t)
dt . (2)
The two notations will be indifferently adopted throughout the
text.
In a phase-sensitive detector, the input signal is demodulated
by mixing to the in-phase and quadrature references rI(t) and
rQ(t), here conveniently taken at frequencyν0 and with unitary
amplitude
rI(t) = cos(2πν0t) (3a)
rQ(t) = sin(2πν0t) . (3b)
The mixed signals are low-pass filtered with transfer function
HLPF and cutoff frequency fBW, to extract the IQ components:
I(t) = HLPF{rI(t)V (t)} = 1
2 As(t) cos(ϕ(t)) (4a)
Q(t) = HLPF{rQ(t)V (t)} = 1
2 As(t) sin(ϕ(t)) . (4b)
The filter suppresses the higher-order frequencies, and deter-
mines the demodulation bandwidth. The signal amplitude and
phase are then calculated as
As(t) = 2
p
I2(t) + Q2(t) (5a)
ϕ′(t) = arctan2(Q(t), I(t)) . (5b)
It is worth to notice that ϕ′(t) is a wrapped version of the
original phase ϕ(t), since the domain of the four-quadrant
inverse tangent function is defined between −π and +π.
These same steps are implemented in our MCU firmware,
as shown in Fig. 2(a). When the signal V (t) is sampled by the
ADC at frequency fsmp, the previous relations remain valid at
discrete instants n/fsmp, with n integer, thus
V [n] = As[n] sin(2πν0n/fsmp + ϕ[n]) . (6)
The IQ references are generated numerically, hence driven by
the OCXO clock and the MCU PLLs, such that
rI[n] = cos(2πν0n/fsmp) (7a)
rQ[n] = sin(2πν0n/fsmp) . (7b)
The LPF with cutoff fBW has been implemented as a finite
impulse response (FIR) filter. Although its higher computa-
tional cost, only partially mitigated by the MCU cache and
FPU, the choice of a FIR filter over a infinite impulse response
(IIR) one is mainly justified by its linear phase response:
this is a key feature for accurate phase measurements without
distortion. Moreover, due to absence of feedback, the intrinsic
stability of FIR filters makes them the optimal solution for
reliable acquisitions, avoiding effects of self-oscillations and
coefficient quantization errors.
With a FIR implementation, the filtered signal becomes
a weighted sum of N + 1 terms, with N the filter order,
and the weight coefficients defining the frequency response.
Consequently, the algorithm complexity can be reduced by
exploiting the system linearity, specifically by combining
the LPF transfer function HLPF with the reference mixing
operation in (4). This means that the demodulation of the
signal components I[n] and Q[n] can be performed with single
4
acquisition trigger
and synchronization
input RF signal
carrier ν0: 1 MHz
bandwith: 1.9 MHz
incremental phase
unwrapping
maximum frequency
deviation: fint/2
IQ demodulation +
LPF + decimation
fint: 10 kHz / 200 kHz
fBW: 1.25 kHz / 25 kHz
output data
transmission
      resolution: 32-bit
      resolution: 16-bit
frequency drift 
correction
(a)
ADC sampling
rate fsmp: 4 MHz
range: 0 V / 2.5 V
resolution: 14-bit
decimation
fout: 500 Hz / 20 kHz
signal phase 
and amplitude
resolution: 32-bit ﬂoat
0
2signal / V
(b) sampling
V (t)
0 1 2 3 4
time / ν−1
0
−1
0
1
reference
rI(t)
rQ(t)
0
20φ / rad
(c) phase unwrapping
wrapped unwrapped ±π
0 50 100 150 200
time / f −1
int
−10
0
10
δφ / rad
Fig. 2. (a) Scheme of the main DSP steps implemented in the microcontroller firmware for signal demodulation. (b) Sketch of the sampled input signal,
demodulated relatively to internal IQ references. (c) Sketch of phase unwrapping to reconstruct the original absolute phase.
FIR filtering operations, having transfer functions HI and HQ
respectively, such that
I[n] = HI{V [n]}
=
NX
i=0
hI[i]V [n − i] = 1
2 As[n] cos(ϕ[n]) (8a)
Q[n] = HQ{V [n]}
=
NX
i=0
hQ[i]V [n − i] = 1
2 As[n] sin(ϕ[n]) . (8b)
Exploiting symmetry properties, the demodulation filter coef-
ficients hI[i] and hQ[i] are calculated as the product between
the LPF coefficients hLPF[i] and the references rI[i] and rQ[i],
respectively:
hI[i] = rI[i]hLPF[i] (9a)
hQ[i] = rQ[i]hLPF[i] . (9b)
It is worth to notice that, although sharing the same LPF co-
efficients and frequency response, characterized by bandwidth
fBW and center frequency ν0, the combination of filtering with
IQ reference mixing allows to discriminate the two orthogonal
signal components, shifted by fsmp/4ν0 samples. Compared to
independent mixing and filtering, this demodulation approach
requires fewer real-time computations for each sample.
Considering that the IQ components are limited to a band-
width fBW, they can be decimated without aliasing down to
a reduced rate fint > 2fBW. Therefore only one sample every
fsmp/fint needs to be processed, effectively reducing the data
rate and CPU load. Amplitude As[n] and wrapped phase ϕ′[n]
are then calculated at the intermediate rate fint using (5).
The algorithm is further optimized by choosing
fsmp = 4ν0 . (10)
In fact, as it can be seen from (7) and Fig. 2(b), in this case half
of the IQ coefficients are equal to zero. This means that the
actual computational cost is halved, or that the filter order of
HI and HQ can be doubled for a given CPU clock frequency.
2) Phase unwrapping: Following the arctan2 function
definition, ϕ′[n] wraps with ±2π jumps when the signal
phase exceeds the ∓π domain bounds [29]. An unwrapping
algorithm is required to recognize and compensate such phase
discontinuities, recovering the continuous phase as sketched
in Fig. 2(c).
The processing is performed on the phase increments,
calculated from the absolute phase values:
δϕ′[n] = ϕ′[n] − ϕ′[n − 1] . (11)
Phase wraps can be detected by searching for values of
wrapped phase increments δϕ′[n] larger than ±π. Conse-
quently, the unwrapped phase increments δϕ[n] can be recon-
structed:



δϕ′[n] > +π : δϕ[n] = δϕ′[n] − 2π
−π ≤ δϕ′[n] ≤ +π : δϕ[n] = δϕ′[n]
δϕ′[n] < −π : δϕ[n] = δϕ′[n] + 2π .
(12)
The absolute phase can be retrieved by integration as
ϕ[n] =
nX
i=1
δϕ[i] . (13)
Nonetheless the samples are always treated in terms of phase
increments during the whole DSP process, since the absolute
5
phase could accumulate rapidly to big values, and floating-
point variables with 32-bit resolution would loose precision
soon. On the contrary, phase increments are confined within
the ±π interval.
Considering that unwrapping is performed for each new
value of δϕ′[n] at the intermediate frequency fint, from (2)
it follows that the instantaneous frequency deviation from the
nominal carrier ν0 is proportional to the unwrapped incremen-
tal phase δϕ[n], thus
∆ν[n] = ν[n] − ν0 = δϕ[n] fint
2π . (14)
In applications where optical signals are affected by phase
noise processes, it is critical to preserve the coherence of
the accumulated phase [30]. This can be broken by two
distinct effects which are addressed in the following. First
of all, big instantaneous frequency deviations, giving rise to
|δϕ[n]| > π, can be mistakenly interpreted as phase wraps and
cause aliasing. The maximum frequency deviation that can be
unwrapped without ambiguity is
∆νmax = ± fint
2 . (15)
Phase undersampling can be avoided by increasing fint. How-
ever the intermediate frequency is typically limited by the
computational power of the processing unit. A good demod-
ulation filtering stage which attenuates the high frequency
components can mitigate the aliasing effects.
Another aspect that can cause phase unwrap failures is
phase noise. In fact, high noise levels added to the original
signal will cause wrong unwrap events. A solution would
be a narrower demodulation bandwidth to suppress a wider
part of the noise spectrum. On the other hand, fBW must
be chosen depending on the actual signal dynamics: if the
demodulation filter band is too narrow, the demodulated signal
can be distorted. Moreover, narrower filtering requires higher
filter orders: at finite computational power this can be achieved
only at lower fint values. Therefore a compromise between this
and the previous limits must be taken into account.
3) Data decimation: Although phase unwrapping must be
performed at high rate to avoid aliasing, the required output
data rate and measurement bandwidth are typically much
lower than fint, which can be of the order of several tens of
kHz. Therefore, after demodulation and phase unwrapping,
amplitude and incremental phase are further decimated to
frequency fout by applying an anti-aliasing FIR filter, and by
taking one sample every fint/fout. The decimated data are then
packed into chunks of samples, and transmitted to the control
computer. Time consistency of samples is guaranteed by the
OCXO clock over all the DSP steps.
4) Acquisition trigger: The MCU supports external trigger-
ing through a digital input assigned to a hardware interrupt
that starts the acquisition. Nevertheless some applications
require synchronous acquisitions at remote locations, without
a direct access to the trigger signal: to meet this requirement,
we enabled the system to accept trigger signals encoded as
specific modulation patterns onto the acquired signal. A dedi-
cated firmware routine manages the acquisition start: initially
the demodulation process is kept running in an idle state,
where either amplitude or phase are continuously sampled
and compared with the required trigger level at rate fint; the
actual data transmission, hence the acquisition timescale, is
started only when the trigger condition is met. Therefore,
the acquisition timescales of independent boards measuring a
common signal can be synchronized, with a maximum relative
delay of ±1/fint given by the condition check rate.
5) Drift correction: Our implementation of IQ demodu-
lation operates with a digital heterodyne reference, fixed by
the OCXO clock. If the carrier frequency of the input signal
differs significantly from the nominal value ν0 or changes over
time, namely by more than a quantity fBW, it can exceed
the demodulation filter band, and the acquisition fails. To
avoid this, a digital proportional-integral-derivative controller
(PID) is implemented in the MCU firmware to track and
compensate in real-time the slow carrier drifts. The PID takes
as input the demodulated frequency deviation passed through
an appropriate LPF, and it adjusts the DDS tuning word at
frequency fdrift. This can be used as negative feedback to drive
either the LO of the input down-conversion mixer or, e.g., an
external modulator that actually shifts the carrier frequency.
The original signal frequency can be reconstructed determin-
istically in post-processing by combining the measurements
with the recorded fdrift values.
C. System configuration
1) DSP parameters: The carrier center frequency is de-
signed as ν0 = 1 MHz. This is a compromise between the
maximum ADC sampling rate and the DSP capabilities on
one hand, and the lower electronic noise affecting the high-
frequency spectrum. Higher central frequencies also enable
wider dynamic ranges to be correctly demodulated. Following
(10), the ADC sampling is triggered by an internal hardware
timer at fsmp = 4ν0 = 4 MHz.
The demodulation FIR filter is obtained combining a low-
pass Hamming window with the IQ references, skipping the
samples corresponding to FIR coefficients equal to zero. An
example is shown in Fig. 3(a). The filter order is limited by
the MCU speed, with 8fsmp/fint filter coefficients. The filter
bandwidth is designed as fBW = fint/8. Different configu-
rations, corresponding to fint between 10 kHz and 200 kHz,
are pre-loaded in the MCU memory, to allow on-the-fly
reconfiguration of the demodulation stage via software. Ex-
amples of filter magnitude responses are reported in Fig. 3(b).
The optimal configuration in terms of dataflow processing
stability and phase unwrap efficiency is typically obtained for
fint = 100 kHz.
The coefficients of the FIR LPF for the output data dec-
imation to rate fout are calculated considering an Hamming
window, with 12fint/fout coefficients, and bandwidth close to
fout/3, optimized to reduce aliasing due to side-lobes of the
filter transfer function. The coefficients are pre-calculated for
fout between 500 Hz and 20 kHz.
The LPF for the frequency drift correction is a first-order
IIR kind. The filter and PID parameters can be configured
by software, depending on the drift dynamics. The cutoff
frequency is typically kept very low in order not to interfere
with the signal high-frequency components of interest.
6
0 40 80 120 160
coeﬃcient number
−0.02
−0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
ﬁlter coeﬃcient
fint = 200 kHz, fBW = 25 kHz
(a)
hI[i] in-phase
hQ[i] quadrature
Hamming window
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
frequency / MHz
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
magnitude response
(b)
fint = 200 kHz, fBW = 25 kHz
fint = 10 kHz, fBW = 1.25 kHz
Fig. 3. (a) Example of coefficients for IQ demodulation and filtering. (b)
Frequency response of the demodulation filter for two intermediate frequency
values.
2) Synchronization: In the case of synchronization of re-
mote systems, with the trigger event being encoded on the
signal to be measured, the choice of fint impacts on the
achievable synchronization resolution. Therefore during the
triggering procedure fint is set at the highest possible value,
i.e. fint = 200 kHz. In this configuration, the maximum jitter
between independent trigger instances is ±5 µs. Assuming
an uniform uncertainty distribution, the expected standard
deviation over the initial timescale is σsync ∼ 3 µs.
After the trigger event is detected, each board switches to
the desired fint value and starts the acquisition. The loss of
synchronization will depend solely on the frequency offset
and drift for the independent clock sources, mostly due to
temperature fluctuations and quartz aging. A firmware routine
is dedicated to resynchronize the acquisitions on-the-fly, with
a small latency of about 110 µs. The routine combines the
trigger detection with a measurement of the relative delay ac-
cumulated since the last resynchronization event. This allows
to compensate for the oscillator frequency fluctuations, fine-
tuning the OCXO adjust voltage on a daily timescale.
The residual delay accumulated by the independent OCXOs
can be estimated assuming a linear fractional frequency drift,
which has been measured to be D ∼ 2 × 10−13 s−1. Accord-
ingly, the time interval after which the cumulative clock delay
reaches the time accuracy of σsync is
p
2σsync/D ∼ 5000 s.
This means that performing a resynchronization procedure ev-
ery hour is sufficient to maintain the timescales synchronized
to within σsync.
3) Numerical resolution: Before unwrapping, δϕ′
m[n] is
defined between −2π and +2π. This means that the numerical
resolution for calculations with 32-bit floating-point variables
is always better than 0.5 µrad. This corresponds to a frequency
resolution of 8 mHz at the typical intermediate frequency
fint = 100 kHz, stressing that this is a conservative estimation
related to big ∆ν values. Amplitude is defined between 0 V
and Vref/2 = 1.25 V, hence its 32-bit floating-point numerical
resolution is better than 0.1 µV.
For transmission bandwidth optimization, the phase and am-
plitude samples are transmitted to the control unit as integers,
with 32-bit and 16-bit resolution respectively, corresponding to
1.5 nrad (or 23 µHz with fint = 100 kHz) and 19 µV. Effects
of numerical truncation can be expected beyond these limits.
D. Software control
The acquired data are transmitted in real-time to a computer
via USB connection. The decimated data are packed in chunks
containing incremental phase, amplitude, frequency drift cor-
rection, and other monitoring variables, with an output data
rate up to 20 kHz. The data are received by a software written
in Python, checked for CRC integrity and stored incrementally
in HDF5 binary files, together with the system settings. The
software controls the embedded system functions via serial
commands, and allows to configure its parameters on-the-fly.
III. E XPERIMENTAL CHARACTERIZATION
Our measurement system has been characterized with RF
signals generated by a commercial synthesizer (3352A, Agi-
lent), externally referenced to a hydrogen maser. The board
was also referenced to the same stable source, to exclude
noise contributions due to the OCXO. The measurement noise
was estimated by acquiring sinusoidal signals having 1 MHz
nominal frequency. The acquisition was configured with fint =
100 kHz and fout = 4 kHz. Fig. 4(a) shows the power spectral
density (PSD) S∆ν(f), with f the Fourier frequency, of
the frequency fluctuations ∆ν measured at different signal
amplitudes, up to As = 1 V. The noise spectra is characterized
by white phase noise, with a negligible additional noise in
the low-frequency region. Weaker signals exhibit higher phase
noise floors, due to the lower signal-to-noise ratio in the
demodulation band: notably the noise power scales as 1/A2
s .
This is consistent with the ADC noise expected considering
the resolution given by its ENOB.
Fig. 4(b) shows the frequency instability calculated in
terms of the overlapping Allan deviation σ∆ν(τa), with τa the
averaging time, for a 1 MHz signal at amplitude 1 V, acquired
for 2000 s with fint = 100 kHz and fout = 10 kHz . The
curve exhibits the expected behavior for white-phase-limited
measurements on a bandwidth of about 4 kHz. In particular,
the impact of white phase noise on the Allan deviation could
be reduced by reconfiguring the output filter to a lower mea-
surement bandwidth. This considerably mitigates the aliasing
7
10−1 100 101 102 103
f / Hz
10−12
10−10
10−8
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
S∆ν / (Hz 2/Hz)
(a)
As = 0.001 V
As = 0.01 V
As = 0.1 V
As = 1 V
10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1 100 101 102 103
τa / s
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
σ∆ν / Hz
(b)
OCXO reference
maser reference
10−6 10−4 10−2 100 102 104 106
input ∆ ν / Hz
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
102
104
106
measured ∆ ν / Hz
∆νmax = fint/2 = 50 kHz
(c)
102 104
10−2
100
meas. As / V
10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1 100 101
input As / V
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
measured As / V
Vref/2 = 1 .25 V
(d)
Fig. 4. (a) PSD of frequency signals acquired with the measurement board as a function of Fourier frequency; the signals are generated with 1 MHz carrier
frequency and variable amplitude. (b) Allan deviation calculated for 1 MHz signals at 1 V amplitude as a function of averaging time, considering either maser
or OCXO reference for the board clock. (c) Measured frequency as a function of nominal input frequency at 1 V amplitude; the dashed diagonal represents
the expected correspondence; the inset shows the corresponding measured amplitude. (d) Amplitude measured as a function of nominal input amplitude for
1 MHz signals; the dashed diagonal represents the expected correspondence.
effects which are often encountered with frequency counters
[31]. When the measurement is repeated with the acquisition
system referenced to the onboard OCXO, the quartz drift
becomes dominant for averaging times above ∼ 10 s.
When fint = 100 kHz , the maximum frequency that can
be measured without aliasing is fint/2 = 50 kHz ; actually,
the demodulation filter has a cutoff of fBW = 12.5 kHz, and
acts as anti-aliasing filter. To address the frequency response
of the demodulation, signals at different carrier frequencies
ν0 + ∆ν were acquired, with ∆ν between 5 µHz and 40 kHz,
and amplitude fixed to 1 V. The measured frequency was
averaged over 50 s at fout = 10 kHz , and compared to the
nominal input frequency as shown in Fig. 4(c). A linear fit to
the data allows quantifying the measurement linearity, as well
as an assessment of the demodulation process accuracy over
10 orders of magnitude. The linearity coefficient is 1 within
2×10−8, while the intercept of about 20 µHz can be attributed
to numerical resolution and truncation. The inset of Fig. 4(c)
quantifies the signal amplitude attenuation as a function of the
input frequency: it confirms that frequency components above
30 kHz are strongly suppressed by the demodulation filter, by
more than 20 dB. Aliasing effects at the phase unwrap stage
are therefore negligible.
We characterized the linearity in the amplitude demod-
ulation by acquiring signals with fixed ∆ν = 0 Hz and
variable amplitude, between 0.3 mV and 1.2 V. The maximum
amplitude that can be measured without distortion is half of
the ADC voltage reference, hence Vref/2 = 1.25 V. The results
are shown in Fig. 4(d). The corresponding linearity coefficient
depends on the knowledge of the input amplification gain,
which is about 15. Nonetheless, the linearity relative uncer-
tainty of 7 × 10−4 and the bias of 0.3 mV give figures for
the corresponding amplitude resolution over almost 4 orders
of magnitude. We also verified that cross-talks between phase
and amplitude are negligible, as long as the signal carrier lays
within the demodulation filter band.
The mechanism of remote synchronization was tested by
arming two different boards to wait for a trigger signal with
8
−10 0 10 20 30 40
time / µs
0
1
2
3signal / V
latency
relative
delay
start ﬂag 1
start ﬂag 2
input signal
Fig. 5. Signals related to the acquisition with two synchronized boards,
acquired with an oscilloscope. A common input RF signal is split and sent to
each system. The carrier frequency is shifted to 1 MHz at time 0 s, and each
board, 1 and 2, starts the acquisition after a latency interval.
amplitude greater than half the nominal amplitude. A common
input signal was obtained through down-conversion using the
DDS, split and sent to the two boards. The signal frequency
was stepped between 1.25 MHz and 1 MHz, to bring it within
the demodulation band and generate a rising amplitude edge,
acting as trigger. The acquired signal was monitored with
an oscilloscope, as shown in Fig. 5. The triggering instants
on each board were detected by raising digital output flags
when the acquisitions started. An average latency of 32 µs was
measured between the instant at which the carrier is shifted
into the demodulation band and the actual acquisition start.
This latency depends only on the system architecture, since
it is caused by the deterministic initialization time required
for the MCU peripherals and by the DSP algorithm, e.g., the
intrinsic FIR filter delay. The average relative delay between
the two boards over 30 synchronized acquisitions showed a
synchronization uncertainty given by a standard deviation of
σsync = 2.9 µs, as expected for 1/fint = 5 µs and discussed in
Section II-C2.
IV. O PTICAL PHASE SENSING
We now consider the case study of two ultrastable lasers
placed in two distant locations, connected by a telecom fiber
link established on a pair of unidirectional optical fibers,
running parallel inside the same cable. At each location we
interfere the laser signals, we measure the beat-note frequency,
and we synchronize the respective acquisition platforms by
encoding a trigger event on the ultrastable carriers. We com-
pensate in real-time the slow frequency drifts of the beat-
note, and we demonstrate the possibility of measuring both the
fiber and laser noises by suitably combining the synchronized
acquisitions.
A. Optical setup
We implemented an experimental layout that allows either
the self-heterodyne interference of each laser source indepen-
dently, exploiting the round-trip path in the fiber as a delay
fdrift
PD2
L2
L1
PD1
foﬀ
(a)
foﬀ
fdrift
PD2
L2
L1
PD1
(b)
Fig. 6. Optical schemes for the comparison between two ultrastable lasers
L1 and L2 through a fiber link. Fiber splitters are used to split and combine
signals; AOMs are used to shift the carrier frequency by foff and fdrift. The
laser signals interfere on photodiodes PD1 and PD2, and the beat-notes are
acquired with independent systems to extract the relative laser noise ρ2 − ρ1
and the fiber noise η. (a) Self-heterodyne detection. (b) Heterodyne detection.
line, or the heterodyne interference of the two lasers on a two-
way approach. The optical setup is shown in Fig. 6.
Each laser source (L1 and L2) is a commercial external
cavity diode laser with 1542 nm wavelength and intrinsic
10 kHz linewidth, frequency stabilized to a 5 cm long, high-
finesse cavity, using the Pound-Drever-Hall technique [32], on
a bandwidth of 200 kHz. The resulting short-term stability is
2 × 10−15, with a drift of the order of 0.5 Hz s−1.
The diode lasers are injected into single-mode optical fibers.
Starting from L1, 5 %of the laser light is split and used as local
reference. The remainder 95 % is sent to the remote location
through the fiber. The link is 36 km long and covers both city
and country areas, with a one-way light travel time of τ ≃
180 µs. At the remote location, the incoming light from L1 is
split using a 50:50 coupler: half of the power is interfered with
the L2 laser reference using a 50:50 coupler, the rest is routed
back to the transmitting source, where it interferes with the
L1 reference light. The light from L2 follows a symmetrical
path.
An acousto-optic modulator (AOM) driven at foff =
40 MHz is introduced on the fiber connecting L1 and L2, close
to L1. Another AOM, driven at adjustable frequency fdrift, is
placed at the L2 output, and it will be used as actuator for the
carrier frequency drift correction.
The beat-notes are acquired on each side with high-speed
photodiodes, PD1 and PD2. Two interference signals corre-
sponding to two optical layouts are simultaneously present
on each photodiode: self-heterodyne detection from the self-
delayed interference of each laser, and heterodyne detec-
tion from the interference between L1 and L2. In the self-
heterodyne scheme the carrier frequency is determined by
foff = 40 MHz . In the heterodyne configuration each pho-
todiode detects the beat-note between the reference signal and
the incoming light from the remote laser: in our experiment,
this is about 1.1 GHz. Accordingly, thanks to the spectral sep-
aration of the self-heterodyne and heterodyne beat-notes, the
measurement scheme can be easily reconfigured to process one
or the other by changing the LO frequency fLO at the down-
conversion stages, i.e., to shift the RF signal of interest to the
9
nominal frequency ν0 = 1 MHz. The down-converted signals
are acquired and demodulated by the respective measurement
boards.
The optical phase is mainly affected by two kinds of noise
contributions: the intrinsic noise of the laser sources, ρ1 and ρ2
respectively, and the noise accumulated along the optical fiber
link η, typically introduced by seismic or anthropic vibrations,
acoustic noise, physical deformations, strains, and temperature
variations. The measurement of these noise signals for the
two considered detection schemes will be discussed in the
following paragraphs.
B. Self-heterodyne detection
Let us consider the self-heterodyne scheme of Fig. 6(a),
where each laser interferes with its self-delayed light. The
beat-notes at frequency foff are down-converted to ν0 using
synthesizers set to fLO = 41 MHz. In this configuration the
drift correction AOM is kept at fixed frequency, hence fdrift is
neglected. The frequency fluctuations acquired by photodiodes
PD1 and PD2 at the respective locations of L1 and L2 are
∆ν1,A(t1) = ρ1(t1 − 2τ) − ρ1(t1)
+ η12|t1−τ
t1−2τ + η21|t1
t1−τ + ∆foff(t1 − 2τ) (16a)
∆ν2,A(t2) = ρ2(t2 − 2τ) − ρ2(t2)
+ η21|t2−τ
t2−2τ + η12|t2
t2−τ + ∆foff(t2 − τ) . (16b)
Here t1 and t2 represent the local timescales, which are
natively independent, ρ1(t1) is the L1 laser frequency noise
at time t1, η21|t1
t1−τ is the one-way fiber frequency noise
integrated over the path from L2 to L1 in the interval between
t1 −τ and t1, and correspondingly for the other terms. ∆foff is
the AOM frequency deviation from its nominal value 40 MHz.
The acquisition timescales t1 and t2 are synchronized ex-
ploiting the triggering mechanism described in Section II-C2.
A step frequency shift is imprinted on foff, driven by the
onboard synthesizer: the self-heterodyne beat-note at each
terminal is momentarily shifted out of the detection band, and
the resulting rising amplitude edge is used to trigger the two
acquisitions. After the synchronization process, a fixed time-
relation can be established between the remote boards. This
is defined as t = t1 − τ = t2, where the relative delay τ
accounts for the fact that the synchronizing pulse travels along
the fiber before being detected at the other end. Variations of
the propagation path delay are sufficiently smaller than the
intrinsic synchronization uncertainty σsync, hence they can be
ignored for the applications considered here. Therefore, after
synchronization, the acquired signals are
∆ν1,A(t) =ρ1(t − 2τ) − ρ1(t) + η12|t−τ
t−2τ + η21|t
t−τ (17a)
∆ν2,A(t) =ρ2(t − 2τ) − ρ2(t) + η12|t
t−τ + η21|t−τ
t−2τ . (17b)
The AOM frequency fluctuations after the synchronization
routine are considered negligible with respect to the other
terms, and neglected through the rest of the analysis.
It can be assumed that, to a first approximation, the laser
noise cancels out, hence ρ(t) ≈ ρ(t − 2τ), which is valid for
frequency fluctuations with spectral components f ≪ 1/τ.
With τ ≃ 180 µs, this is justified for spectral analysis below
0 2 4 6
time / s
−8
−4
0
4
8
∆ν / kHz
(a)
∆ν1,A
∆ν2,A
4.76 4.78 4.80
time / s
−4
−2
0
2
4
10−2 10−1 100 101 102 103
f / Hz
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
103
105
S∆ν / (Hz 2/Hz)
(b)
∆ν1,A
∆ν2,A
∆ν1,A − ∆ν2,A
∆ν1,A delayed by τ
Fig. 7. (a) Synchronized acquisitions of frequency fluctuations over the
optical fiber link, in the self-heterodyne interference scheme; the tracks mostly
overlap. (b) PSD of the acquired signals; the noise spectrum of their difference
is also shown, compared with the noise expected for a synchronization delay
τ ≃ 180 µs.
1 kHz Fourier frequency. Moreover, the phase perturbations
η12 and η21 are expected to be mostly correlated, as the noise
of the two fibers, laying in the same cable, is common to the
first order. It follows that the interference signals are mostly
affected by the common fiber noise η ≈ η12 ≈ η21, and the
round-trip frequency fluctuations can be approximated as
∆ν1,A(t) ≃2η(t) (18a)
∆ν2,A(t) ≃2η(t) . (18b)
The degree of temporal correlation, as well as the quality of
the synchronization process, can be appreciated from Fig. 7(a),
showing the coincidence between frequency fluctuation signals
acquired at 1 kHz by the two distant boards. Fig. 7(b) shows
the PSD of the frequency noise for each of the two beat-notes,
calculated for 50 min long acquisitions. The spectra mostly
overlap, since from (18) they refer to the same physical signals.
The measurements are consistent with the noise expected for
an urban fiber link, where the phase perturbations generated
by different anthropic, seismic, oscillatory, or acoustic sources
accumulate along the fiber path. Indeed, the measured white
frequency noise level is compatible with other land-deployed
cables reported in literature [33], [34], [35], assuming a linear
scaling of the noise PSD with the link length. Nevertheless,
the actual scaling strongly depends on the specific deployment,
10
which can cross data centers, bridges, buildings and suspended
fiber segments. The observation of daily fluctuations in the
noise spectrum, 5 dB to 15 dB higher during the day compared
to night, can be attributed to human activities, such as vehicle
traffic along the roads adjacent to the fiber path. These aspects
play an important role in applications where the dissemination
of stable phase signals is required [36].
The spectrum of the difference between the two synchro-
nized acquisitions is also shown in Fig. 7(b). The residual
noise level that is observed for ∆ν1,A − ∆ν2,A is consistent
with the expectations for the difference between correlated,
yet delayed, signals. Indeed, from (17), the acquisitions have
a relative delay equal to the light travel time τ, given by
the synchronization procedure, and [37], the spectrum of
the round-trip fiber noise difference can be estimated as
(2πτ f)2S∆ν1,A(f), with S∆ν1,A(f) the PSD of ∆ν1,A ≃ ∆ν1,B
at Fourier frequency f. The measurement deviates from the
expectations only at very low frequencies, where other effects
emerge. We attribute this additional noise to optical length
variations for the short fibers which are not common for the
two path.
C. Heterodyne detection
In the heterodyne configuration, shown in Fig. 6(b), each
local laser interferes with the light coming from the remote
laser. The beat-notes between L1 and L2 are down-converted
to ν0 by setting fLO to about 1.1 GHz. The AOM at foff is
driven at fixed frequency, hence it is neglected in this scheme.
The optical carrier of L2 is shifted exploiting the AOM driven
at fdrift by the onboard DDS, centered at 40 MHz, to correct
the slow beat-note drifts that are due to uncorrelated length
variations of the two optical cavities. Similarly to the self-
heterodyne case, in the heterodyne scheme the acquisitions
are synchronized by imprinting a step frequency shift on fdrift,
defining the common timescale t = t1 −τ = t2. The following
frequency fluctuations are expected to affect the PD1 and PD2
photodiode signals:
∆ν1,B(t) =ρ2(t − τ) − ρ1(t)
+ ∆fdrift(t − τ) + η21|t
t−τ
(19a)
∆ν2,B(t) =ρ1(t − τ) − ρ2(t)
− ∆fdrift(t) + η12|t
t−τ . (19b)
The drift correction frequency results from the PID imple-
mented in the MCU firmware, as described in Section II-B5.
This tracks the low frequency components of ∆ν2,B, with a
LPF cutoff of 0.01 Hz. In that spectral region the relative
drift between the independent lasers L1 and L2 dominates,
hence ∆fdrift mainly follows the low-frequency components
of ρ1 − ρ2. Due to symmetry, any frequency offset cancels out
for both ∆ν1,B and ∆ν2,B.
Although in metrology the fiber link noise represents a
limit for the comparison of optical frequency references and
requires phase stabilization techniques [36], from a different
perspective the fiber can be used as a sensor for earthquakes
and other geophysical events occurring close to the fiber [9].
With the heterodyne scheme, the reference laser and fiber
noise contributions can be distinguished. Under the same
0 400 800
time / s
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
∆ν / kHz
(a) without drift correction
∆ν1,B
∆ν2,B
0 400 800
time / s
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
with drift correction
∆fdrift
10−2 10−1 100 101 102 103
f / Hz
10−7
10−5
10−3
10−1
101
103
105
S∆ν / (Hz 2/Hz)
(b)
∆ν1,B
∆ν2,B
∆ν1,B − ∆ν2,B − 2∆fdrift
∆ν1,B + ∆ν2,B
∆fdrift
Fig. 8. (a) Synchronized acquisitions of frequency fluctuations over the optical
fiber link, in the heterodyne interference scheme, without and with frequency
drift correction; with drift correction the tracks mostly overlap. (b) PSD of
the acquired signals, with drift correction; the noise spectra of their sum and
difference are also reported. .
assumptions introduced for (18), the approximated frequency
fluctuations on the two photodiodes become
∆ν1,B(t) ≃ρ2(t) − ρ1(t) + ∆fdrift(t) + η(t) (20a)
∆ν2,B(t) ≃ρ1(t) − ρ2(t) − ∆fdrift(t) + η(t) . (20b)
It follows that, from the combination of ∆ν1,B and ∆ν2,B, it
is possible to extract the fiber noise
∆ν1,B(t) + ∆ν2,B(t) ≃ 2η(t) (21)
and the relative laser noise
∆ν1,B(t) − ∆ν2,B(t) − 2∆fdrift(t) ≃ 2(ρ2(t) − ρ1(t)) . (22)
The effects of frequency drifts can be seen from Fig. 8(a).
Without activating the drift correction, ∆ν1,B and ∆ν2,B show
significant offsets, variable in time. When the drift correction
is enabled, the synchronized tracks are characterized by fast
frequency fluctuations that lay around zero, with the low-
frequency drift being tracked by ∆fdrift.
The PSDs of the acquired signals are shown in Fig. 8(b),
mostly overlapping except at low frequencies, where ∆fdrift
dominates. ∆ν1,B and ∆ν2,B are combined to show either the
fiber noise or the relative laser frequency noise using (21) and
(22). It can be seen that the fiber noise represents the main
contribution in the measurements for our setup, and that it is
11
similar to the self-heterodyne results presented in Fig. 7(b).
The measured laser noise is consistent with the expectations
for ultrastable sources [38], noting that the lasers are installed
in suboptimal conditions, outside a laboratory and subject to
environmental disturbances. For example, some acoustic spurs
are present above 10 Hz, likely given by cooling fans close to
the setups. The laser noise dominates at very low frequencies
below 0.1 Hz, where the laser drift is compensated by the
frequency drift correction.
V. C ONCLUSION
In the current work, a phase-sensitive detector has been
designed and implemented on a MCU. Dedicated electronic
and firmware platforms have been realized and characterized.
Following the approach of digital lock-in amplifiers, the sys-
tem implements efficient algorithms for phase and amplitude
heterodyne demodulation of RF signals down-converted to
1 MHz. An output data rate of 20 kHz can be achieved, with
a reconfigurable demodulation bandwidth between 1.25 kHz
and 12.5 kHz. The input frequency deviation from the 1 MHz
carrier can be measured over almost 10 orders of magnitude,
from a few µ Hz up to 50 kHz. The accepted input signal
amplitude spans over more than 3 voltage decades. Frequency
instability at 1 s is about 10 µHz, amplitude accuracy is better
than 1 mV. A stable quartz oscillator is embedded as frequency
reference for deployable operation.
The acquisition system is mainly designed for the demod-
ulation of phase signals from coherent optical interferometry,
hence for measurements of the optical carrier frequency. Its
characterization confirmed that the board performances are
suitable for the analysis of optical frequency signals. Taking
advantage of the optical-to-rf leveraging, the relative impact
of the reported frequency measurement errors are of the
order of 10−19 , which is appropriate for many applications
that do not require optical-clock-level accuracy. Notably, the
operation principle provides this platform with all the typical
advantages of a phase analyzer over, e.g., frequency counters.
These include, among others, high sampling rates, intrinsically
dead-time-free measurements, and well-defined user-selectable
bandwidth. Moreover the phase measurement is combined
with amplitude demodulation as in lock-in amplifiers, allowing
to monitor the dynamic evolution of the carrier strength and
synchronization capabilities.
An in-field demonstration of remote fiber sensing using
distant ultrastable laser sources has been performed. The
optical phase was acquired as carrier frequency fluctuations
exploiting the self-heterodyne and heterodyne interferometric
schemes, allowing to measure the relative noise of the laser
sources and the fiber link noise.
Compared to commercial benchtop systems or FPGAs, the
presented system is characterized by higher flexibility, stand-
alone operation, simpler architecture, compact footprint, and
much lower costs. It allows for real-time and continuous
monitoring applications, supporting wide ranges of amplitude
and frequency of the input signal. The embedded triggering
mechanism permits to synchronize distant boards at the level
of a few µs without requiring additional channels or protocols,
and allowing quantitative signal comparisons and correlation
analysis. The DSP algorithm optimization enables high per-
formances also on a cheap and reliable MCU. The platform
represents an efficient possibility in deployable long-term
experiments. Particularly interesting applications are related
to fiber noise sensing, such as for earthquake monitoring, or
metrological comparisons of distant laser sources using optical
interferometry.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Open Fiber, in particular Francesco
Carpentieri, and Metallurgica Bresciana for their support in
providing and using the fiber testbed in the framework of
Project MEGLIO. This work is supported by the European
Metrology Program for Innovation and Research (EMPIR)
Project 20FUN08 Nextlasers, which has received funding from
the EMPIR program co-financed by the Participating States
and from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Takamoto, I. Ushijima, N. Ohmae, T. Yahagi, K. Kokado, H. Shinkai,
and H. Katori, “Test of general relativity by a pair of transportable
optical lattice clocks,” Nature Photonics, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 411–415,
2020.
[2] J. Grotti, S. Koller, S. V ogt, S. H ¨afner, U. Sterr, C. Lisdat, H. Denker,
C. V oigt, L. Timmen, A. Rolland, F. N. Baynes, H. S. Margolis,
M. Zampaolo, P. Thoumany, M. Pizzocaro, B. Rauf, F. Bregolin,
A. Tampellini, P. Barbieri, M. Zucco, G. A. Costanzo, C. Clivati, F. Levi,
and D. Calonico, “Geodesy and metrology with a transportable optical
clock,” Nature Physics, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 437–441, 2018.
[3] L. C. Sinclair, I. Coddington, W. C. Swann, G. B. Rieker, A. Hati,
K. Iwakuni, and N. R. Newbury, “Operation of an optically coherent
frequency comb outside the metrology lab,” Optics Express , vol. 22,
no. 6, pp. 6996–7006, 2014.
[4] G. B. Rieker, F. R. Giorgetta, W. C. Swann, J. Kofler, A. M. Zolot, L. C.
Sinclair, E. Baumann, C. Cromer, G. Petron, C. Sweeney, P. P. Tans,
I. Coddington, and N. R. Newbury, “Frequency-comb-based remote
sensing of greenhouse gases over kilometer air paths,” Optica, vol. 1,
no. 5, pp. 290–298, 2014.
[5] E. D. Caldwell, L. C. Sinclair, N. R. Newbury, and J.-D. Deschenes,
“The time-programmable frequency comb and its use in quantum-limited
ranging,” Nature, vol. 610, no. 7933, pp. 667–673, 2022.
[6] H. Bergeron, L. C. Sinclair, W. C. Swann, I. Khader, K. C. Cossel,
M. Cermak, J.-D. Desch ˆenes, and N. R. Newbury, “Femtosecond time
synchronization of optical clocks off of a flying quadcopter,” Nature
Communications, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 1819, 2019.
[7] D. R. Gozzard, L. A. Howard, B. P. Dix-Matthews, S. F. E. Karpathakis,
C. T. Gravestock, and S. W. Schediwy, “Ultrastable Free-Space Laser
Links for a Global Network of Optical Atomic Clocks,” Physical Review
Letters, vol. 128, no. 2, p. 020801, 2022.
[8] G. Marra, C. Clivati, R. Luckett, A. Tampellini, J. Kronj ¨ager, L. Wright,
A. Mura, F. Levi, S. Robinson, A. Xuereb, B. Baptie, and D. Calonico,
“Ultrastable laser interferometry for earthquake detection with terrestrial
and submarine cables,” Science, vol. 361, no. 6401, pp. 486–490, 2018.
[9] G. Marra, D. M. Fairweather, V . Kamalov, P. Gaynor, M. Cantono,
S. Mulholland, B. Baptie, J. C. Castellanos, G. Vagenas, J.-O. Gaudron,
J. Kronj¨ager, I. R. Hill, M. Schioppo, I. Barbeito Edreira, K. A. Burrows,
C. Clivati, D. Calonico, and A. Curtis, “Optical interferometry–based
array of seafloor environmental sensors using a transoceanic submarine
cable,” Science, vol. 376, no. 6595, pp. 874–879, 2022.
[10] E. Ip, Y .-K. Huang, G. Wellbrock, T. Xia, M.-F. Huang, T. Wang, and
Y . Aono, “Vibration Detection and Localization Using Modified Digital
Coherent Telecom Transponders,” Journal of Lightwave Technology ,
vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1472–1482, 2022.
[11] Z. Zhan, M. Cantono, V . Kamalov, A. Mecozzi, R. M ¨uller, S. Yin, and
J. C. Castellanos, “Optical polarization–based seismic and water wave
sensing on transoceanic cables,” Science, vol. 371, no. 6532, pp. 931–
936, 2021.
12
[12] C. Clivati, A. Meda, S. Donadello, S. Virz `ı, M. Genovese, F. Levi,
A. Mura, M. Pittaluga, Z. Yuan, A. J. Shields, M. Lucamarini, I. P.
Degiovanni, and D. Calonico, “Coherent phase transfer for real-world
twin-field quantum key distribution,” Nature Communications, vol. 13,
no. 1, p. 157, 2022.
[13] J. A. Sherman and R. J ¨ordens, “Oscillator metrology with software
defined radio,”Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 87, no. 5, p. 054711,
2016.
[14] S. Mukherjee, J. Millo, B. Marechal, S. Denis, G. Goavec-M ´erou, J.-M.
Friedt, Y . Kersal´e, and C. Lacroˆute, “Digital Doppler-Cancellation Servo
for Ultrastable Optical Frequency Dissemination Over Fiber,” IEEE
Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control ,
vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 878–885, 2022.
[15] C. Clivati, P. Savio, S. Abrate, V . Curri, R. Gaudino, M. Pizzocaro,
and D. Calonico, “Robust optical frequency dissemination with a dual-
polarization coherent receiver,”Optics Express, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 8494–
8511, 2020.
[16] A. Tourigny-Plante, V . Michaud-Belleau, N. Bourbeau H ´ebert, H. Berg-
eron, J. Genest, and J.-D. Desch ˆenes, “An open and flexible digital
phase-locked loop for optical metrology,” Review of Scientific Instru-
ments, vol. 89, no. 9, p. 093103, 2018.
[17] G. Yang, J. F. Barry, E. S. Shuman, M. H. Steinecker, and D. DeMille, “A
low-cost, FPGA-based servo controller with lock-in amplifier,” Journal
of Instrumentation, vol. 7, no. 10, p. P10026, 2012.
[18] J. Elaskar, M. A. Luda, L. Tozzetti, J. Codnia, and C. J. Oton, “FPGA-
Based High-Speed Optical Fiber Sensor Based on Multitone-Mixing In-
terferometry,”IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement ,
vol. 71, pp. 1–11, 2022.
[19] F. Barone, E. Calloni, L. DiFiore, A. Grado, L. Milano, and G. Russo,
“High-performance modular digital lock-in amplifier,” Review of Scien-
tific Instruments, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 3697–3702, 1995.
[20] K. Kishore and S. A. Akbar, “Evolution of Lock-In Amplifier as Portable
Sensor Interface Platform: A Review,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 20,
no. 18, pp. 10 345–10 354, 2020.
[21] C. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Ge, and H. Dong, “FPGA-Based Digital Lock-in
Amplifier With High-Precision Automatic Frequency Tracking,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 123 114–123 122, 2020.
[22] G. Gervasoni, M. Carminati, and G. Ferrari, “Switched ratiometric lock-
in amplifier enabling sub-ppm measurements in a wide frequency range,”
Review of Scientific Instruments , vol. 88, no. 10, p. 104704, 2017.
[23] G. A. Stimpson, M. S. Skilbeck, R. L. Patel, B. L. Green, and G. W.
Morley, “An open-source high-frequency lock-in amplifier,” Review of
Scientific Instruments, vol. 90, no. 9, p. 094701, 2019.
[24] Z. Wang, X. Shi, W. Wang, and W. Cai, “High-Performance Digi-
tal Lock-in Amplifier Module based on an Open-Source Red Pitaya
Platform: Implementation and Applications,” IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement , pp. 1–1, 2022.
[25] M. A. K. Nooruddin and S. Roy, “A simple digital phase-sensitive
detector using A VR microcontroller,” American Journal of Physics ,
vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 153–158, 2020.
[26] A. Dorrington and R. Kunnemeyer, “A simple microcontroller based
digital lock-in amplifier for the detection of low level optical signals,”
in Proceedings First IEEE International Workshop on Electronic Design,
Test and Applications ’2002, 2002, pp. 486–488.
[27] J. Leis, P. Martin, and D. Buttsworth, “Simplified digital lock-in ampli-
fier algorithm,” Electronics Letters, vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 259–261, 2012.
[28] S. Zhang, G. Li, L. Lin, and J. Zhao, “Optimization of a digital
lock-in algorithm with a square-wave reference for frequency-divided
multi-channel sensor signal detection,” Review of Scientific Instruments,
vol. 87, no. 8, p. 085102, 2016.
[29] K. Itoh, “Analysis of the phase unwrapping algorithm,” Applied Optics,
vol. 21, no. 14, pp. 2470–2470, 1982.
[30] V . V . V olkov and Y . Zhu, “Deterministic phase unwrapping in the
presence of noise,” Optics Letters, vol. 28, no. 22, pp. 2156–2158, 2003.
[31] C. E. Calosso, C. Clivati, and S. Micalizio, “Avoiding Aliasing in
Allan Variance: An Application to Fiber Link Data Analysis,” IEEE
Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control ,
vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 646–655, 2016.
[32] E. D. Black, “An introduction to Pound–Drever–Hall laser frequency
stabilization,” American Journal of Physics , vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 79–87,
2001.
[33] T. Akatsuka, H. Ono, K. Hayashida, K. Araki, M. Takamoto, T. Takano,
and H. Katori, “30-km-long optical fiber link at 1397 nm for frequency
comparison between distant strontium optical lattice clocks,” Japanese
Journal of Applied Physics , vol. 53, no. 3, p. 032801, 2014.
[34] T. Akatsuka, T. Goh, H. Imai, K. Oguri, A. Ishizawa, I. Ushijima,
N. Ohmae, M. Takamoto, H. Katori, T. Hashimoto, H. Gotoh, and
T. Sogawa, “Optical frequency distribution using laser repeater stations
with planar lightwave circuits,” Optics Express, vol. 28, no. 7, p. 9186,
2020.
[35] O. Lopez, A. Haboucha, F. K ´ef´elian, H. Jiang, B. Chanteau, V . Roncin,
C. Chardonnet, A. Amy-Klein, and G. Santarelli, “Cascaded multiplexed
optical link on a telecommunication network for frequency dissemina-
tion,” Optics Express, vol. 18, no. 16, pp. 16 849–16 857, 2010.
[36] P. A. Williams, W. C. Swann, and N. R. Newbury, “High-stability
transfer of an optical frequency over long fiber-optic links,” JOSA B ,
vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 1284–1293, 2008.
[37] C. E. Calosso, E. Bertacco, D. Calonico, C. Clivati, G. A. Costanzo,
M. Frittelli, F. Levi, A. Mura, and A. Godone, “Frequency transfer via
a two-way optical phase comparison on a multiplexed fiber network,”
Optics Letters, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1177–1180, 2014.
[38] C. Clivati, A. Mura, D. Calonico, F. Levi, G. A. Costanzo, C. E. Calosso,
and A. Godone, “Planar-waveguide external cavity laser stabilization for
an optical link with 10-19 frequency stability,” IEEE Transactions on
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, vol. 58, no. 12, pp.
2582–2587, 2011.