Oscillator metrology with software deﬁned radio
Jeﬀ A. Sherman 1, a) and Robert J¨ ordens1, b)
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Division of Time and Frequency,
Boulder, Colorado, USA
(Dated: 6 August 2016)
Analog electrical elements such as mixers, ﬁlters, transfer oscillators, isolating buﬀers,
dividers, and even transmission lines contribute technical noise and unwanted envi-
ronmental coupling in time and frequency measurements. Software deﬁned radio
(SDR) techniques replace many of these analog components with digital signal pro-
cessing (DSP) on rapidly sampled signals. We demonstrate that, generically, com-
mercially available multi-channel SDRs are capable of time and frequency metrology,
outperforming purpose-built devices by as much as an order-of-magnitude. For ex-
ample, for signals at 10 MHz and 6 GHz, we observe SDR time deviation noise ﬂoors
of about 20 fs and 1 fs, respectively, in under 10 ms of averaging. Examining the
other complex signal component, we ﬁnd a relative amplitude measurement insta-
bility of 3× 10−7 at 5 MHz. We discuss the scalability of a SDR-based system for
simultaneous measurement of many clocks. SDR’s frequency agility allows for com-
parison of oscillators at widely diﬀerent frequencies. We demonstrate a novel and
extreme example with optical clock frequencies diﬀering by many terahertz: using a
femtosecond-laser frequency comb and SDR, we show femtosecond-level time com-
parisons of ultra-stable lasers with zero measurement dead-time.
a)Electronic mail: jeﬀ.sherman@nist.gov
b)Electronic mail: rj@m-labs.hk
1
arXiv:1605.03505v1  [physics.ins-det]  11 May 2016
I. OVERVIEW
Time is best measured by counting periods of natural or manmade oscillators 22. To
maximize temporal resolution we must interpolate between integer periods, a task equivalent
to determining an oscillator’s phase. Consider two oscillators with frequency f, the periods
of which can be counted as clocks. Their phase oﬀset ∆ φ(tk) (in radians) at a measurement
epoch tk can be interpreted as a time oﬀset 3,
∆T (tk) = ∆φ(tk)
2πf . (1)
Resolving whether ∆T is stationary is the most sensitive method for detecting small fre-
quency oﬀsets or ﬂuctuations between the oscillators and thus calibrating or characterizing
them as clocks 26,49. For continuously running clocks, a linear drift in ∆ T deﬁnes a (frac-
tional) frequency oﬀset between the oscillators y = [∆T (t2)− ∆T (t1)]/(t2−t1) consistent
with the notion that frequency is the rate of change of phase.
In this work, we brieﬂy review existing high-resolution techniques for measuring ∆ T of
radio frequency oscillators. We introduce the software deﬁned radio (SDR) concept in the
context of time and frequency metrology, and describe basic demonstration experiments valid
for many SDR implementations. Finally, we explore SDR’s ability to compare oscillators at
dissimilar frequencies and to scale to many-oscillator comparisons. One new SDR application
is discussed in some detail: phase-coherent measurement of optical clocks via a femtosecond
laser frequency comb.
A. Radio techniques in oscillator metrology
Though clock frequencies may be high, measurement bandwidth need not be for com-
paring oscillators i and r that are similar in frequency, fi≈ fr. Since clock oscillators are
typically very stable, a signal at fi−fr is both low in bandwidth and low in absolute fre-
quency and therefore amenable to high-precision measurement. Such frequency translation
is rooted in radio techniques—transmitters shift a signal of low- to moderate-bandwidth
upwards to many megahertz or gigahertz for ease of wide-area propagation while receivers
spectrally convert the signal back to its original band with no practical loss in information.
The widely applied dual-mixer time-diﬀerence (DMTD) technique 3, illustrated in Fig-
ure 1a, is an example of radio frequency translation applied to oscillator metrology. A
2
low-pass
low-pass
zero-cross 
detector 
mixer
zero-cross 
detector PLL 
PLL
Time interval counter 
FPGA 
accumulator 
(frequency tuning word) 
“start” 
“stop” 
transfer
oscillator
a)  Generic dual-mixer time-difference (DMTD) scheme
b)  Software-defined radio (single channel)
sample
clock
DSP
NCO
NCO
DDC
DDC
DDC
 clock
ADC
high-pass
filter
decimation 
& filters 
formatter &
network interface 
output 
output 
PLL
FPGA 
c)  Software-defined radio (dual channel)
sample
clock
ADC1
ADC2
high-pass
high-pass
decimation 
& filters 
decimation 
& filters 
formatter & 
network interface 
outputs 
d)  Example SDR output data processing chains 
complex-
divide
(single channel vs. reference clock) (dual channel; common frequency)
FIG. 1. Schematic comparison of a) generic dual-mixer time-diﬀerence (DMTD), and b) a software
deﬁned radio (SDR) described here. Dashed-lines surround digital processing sections. In both
concepts,fi is the frequency of an oscillator under test. A reference oscillatorfr disciplines a digital
clock at fast frequency νm through a phase-locked-loop (PLL). Both methods gain resolution by
spectrally shifting fi to a low frequency fb; in SDR, the mixer analogue is digital downconversion
(DDC) with a synthesized numerically-controlled oscillator (NCO). c) Two oscillators fi and fj
are compared in two channels of a single ADC, suppressing noise due to the νm PLL, its reference
tonefr, and the ADC’s aperture jitter. d) While DMTD directly outputs time-oﬀset data; further
processing is performed on the SDR sampled waveform z(tk) with a computer to determine time
oﬀset. We illustrate two simpliﬁed processing chains for single- and dual-channel measurements;
see text for details.
3
transfer oscillator is synthesized at fr−fb, slightly oﬀset from input and reference oscilla-
tors fi and fr: (|fi−fr|≪ fb≪ fi,r). The transfer oscillator is mixed (multiplied) with
bothfr andfi tones, creating two signals with frequencies nearfb after low-pass ﬁltering. A
time-interval counter (TIC) counts periods of a fast timebase oscillator νm, also disciplined
byfr, gated by high slew-rate zero-crossing detectors observing the two heterodyne products
near fb.
As a consequence of the spectral conversion, DMTD methods resolve ∆ T≤ 1 ps accu-
rately, despite no component possessing a bandwidth approaching (1 ps)−1 = 1 THz. DMTD
realizations often employ an oﬀset frequency 1 Hz ≤ fb≤ 10 Hz and heterodyne factors
105≤fr/fb≤ 107, so a TIC must only accurately resolve ∆T∼ 1µs between the relatively
slow oscillations near fb to discern (fr/fb)−1(1 µs)∼ 1 ps of oscillator time diﬀerence.
While DMTD techniques are already highly reﬁned 48, ∆T of 1 ps can be mimicked or
masked by ﬂuctuations of≈ 200 µm in electrical length or group delay, so even cables con-
tribute to instability (the temperature dependence is of order 0.5 ps m −1 K−1). Analog
components (including ‘digital’ mixers) can contribute ﬂicker-phase noise 31, amplitude-to-
phase-modulation conversion 9, sensitivity to interference (e.g., channel crosstalk, ground
loops, wideband ambient rf), and coupling to the environment (e.g., temperature, humid-
ity). The TIC start- and stop-inputs require high-bandwidth, high slew-rate triggers, but
the signals following the mixers are slow sinusoids. Zero-crossing detectors must therefore
boost signal slew rates by ∼ 106 while accurately preserving phase 7. Without additional
synthesis steps, DMTD requires fr and fi to be very similar, and among a small set of fre-
quencies compatible with the analog processing components. Mixer and ﬁlter non-linearity
and frequency-dependent group delay complicate maintaining a whole-system ∆ T calibra-
tion over arbitrary signal frequencies. Finally, DMTD schemes cannot resolve ﬂuctuations
over time scales shorter than 1/fb.
B. Related work
Some limitations in DMTD can be addressed by replacing certain analog processing steps
with digital implementations. The TIC can be dramatically redesigned 34 with much higher
eﬀective νm. One group 44 replaced the TIC by digitizing the mixed and ﬁltered signals at
fb and later eliminated the mixers with high-speed direct sampling of the input signals 29.
4
Others have replaced mixer-based spectral down-conversion with aliasing through under-
sampling36. Early consideration of a direct-sampling system 25 very similar to the present
work showed plausible limits due to quantization eﬀects alone can be ∆T <1 fs (τ/1 s)−1/2
for averaging intervalsτ. While high-speed samples can be processed entirely in software39 or
with custom hardware17, this work explores oscillator metrology using an inexpensive, com-
mercially available, unmodiﬁed software deﬁned radio (SDR). We note a similar approach for
characterizing ADCs8. We employ an ADC noise cancelation technique in the time domain,
which perhaps is analogous to cross-spectral analysis 38 in the frequency domain.
II. SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIO
A. “Sample ﬁrst, ask questions later”
In SDR28, signals of interest are sampled by a fast, high-resolution analog-to-digital con-
verter (ADC) with little or no analog processing, ampliﬁcation, or ﬁltering. A numerically-
controlled oscillator (NCO), computed synchronously with ADC sampling, takes the place of
the local oscillator tone in analog radio reception. A digital multiplication of the sampled sig-
nal and NCO phasor performs the role of signal mixer. Filtering and sample rate decimation
are also performed digitally, reducing noise bandwidth while conserving signal information.
Here we focus on SDR receiver functions, but many SDRs are capable of transmission as
well. Since the signal processing chain in SDR is highly-conﬁgurable, it has applications in
radar, spread-spectrum and multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communication, and
advanced protocol demodulation and simulation.
SDR seems to suﬀer a signiﬁcant disadvantage: noise ﬁgures of high-speed ADCs are much
worse than a collection of radio frequency ﬁlters, ampliﬁers, and mixers. On the other hand—
especially in the context of precision metrology—analog components are subject to strict
impedance matching requirements and exhibit long-term sensitivity to shock, vibration,
supply voltage, temperature, humidity, aging, interference, and signal crosstalk. A low
ADC signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is at least amenable to averaging and process gain, while
environmental sensitivities are more pernicious sources of stochastic noise and drift over long
durations. In contrast, digital processing steps are stable, deterministic, and environmentally
insensitive.
5
B. Technical details
At the time of writing, the techniques presented here ought to apply to SDRs from at
least ten manufacturers. While we attempt to consider SDR generically, Figure 1b illustrates
relevant components in the SDR receiver studied here (an Ettus USRP N210 except where
noted1). Field programmable gate array (FPGA) hardware description code and circuit
schematics are available for inspection and customization 11,12. A receiver daughterboard
couples a ground-referenced input signal (1 to 250 MHz) into a diﬀerential ADC via a
transformer. The ADC (Texas Instruments ADS62P44) has an analog input bandwidth of
450 MHz (−3dB), a full-scale range of±1 V, and 14-bit resolution. The ADC speciﬁcations
include an aperture jitter tap = 150 fs, a signiﬁcant technical timing uncertainty between
an idealized sample trigger and actuation of the converter’s sample-and-hold circuitry. The
sample timebase, a voltage-controlled crystal oscillator (VCXO) at νm = 100 MHz, drives
the ADC sampling trigger and the FPGA’s digital signal processing (DSP) pipeline. The
SDR includes phase-locked loop (PLL, bandwidth ≈ 3 kHz) components, which we often
use to discipline νm to a +14 dBm signal at fr = 10 MHz derived from an active hydrogen
maser. In our conﬁguration, this SDR consumes about 10 W of dc power.
SDR’s three important DSP tasks are frequency translation, ﬁltering, and data decima-
tion. After a high-pass ﬁlter suppresses the ADC’s zero-oﬀset, the input signal undergoes
digital down-conversion (DDC), or frequency translation by an NCO tuned to
fa =νm× a
232, (2)
wherea is an integer 0≤a< 232. As in direct digital synthesis (DDS), a phase register accu-
mulates the frequency-tuning word a upon every νm clock cycle, the most signiﬁcant bits of
which are used to derive complex NCO phasor components. However, unlike many DDS im-
plementations, SDR often does not use the phase register as an index in a large lookup table
of precomputed trigonometric values. Instead, SDR often implements coordinate rotation
digital computer (CORDIC)47 to compute NCO phasors in ﬁxed-point arithmetic. Exploit-
ing the equivalence between angle rotation and phase accumulation, CORDIC is a succes-
sive approximation algorithm built from logical operations well suited to a DSP pipeline:
comparisons, bit shifts, and binary addition. After inspection of the two most signiﬁcant ac-
cumulator bits ﬁxes the phase quadrant, this SDR implements K = 20 CORDIC iterations
on 24-bit phase words for an approximate angle resolution of tan −1[
2−(K−1)]
= 1.9 µrad.
6
Signal (V) 
-1 
0
1a) 
Sample time (s)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Phase (rad.) 
0
c) 
Residual 
(mV) 
0.5
-0.5
b) 
FIG. 2. SDR measurement of a signal at fi = fr = 10 MHz, spectrally-shifted by DDC to
fb = 10 MHz− (429, 496, 386× 2−32× 100 MHz)≈ 8 Hz. a) One second (10 6 buﬀered samples)
of z(tk) =I(tk) +iQ(tk) data. b) The residual amplitude of I(tk) after removing a best-ﬁt single-
tone. The noise is predominately white, but modulation related to fb and proportional to |I(tk)|
is clearly observed. c) The instantaneous phase evolves as 2 πfbt; here we plot arg z(tk) wrapped
into−π <argz(tk)≤π.
CORDIC approximates resampling the real input signal into a complex frame rotating atfa,
adding negligible quantization noise (approximately equivalent to σx(τ) = 0.3 fs (τ/1 s)−1/2
at 10 MHz). The SDR ultimately truncates the resulting signal to 16 bits of resolution for
each of the in-phase (I) and quadrature-phase (Q) components.
Transmission and manipulation of output samples z(tk) =I(tk) +iQ(tk) at the physical
sample rate νm would require ≈ 3 Gbps in network and storage resources. Fortunately,
DDC shifts the signal of interest close to baseband, allowing aggressive low-pass ﬁltering
and rate-decimation (by up to a factor of 512) in hardware. The SDR ﬁlters and decimates
in three conﬁgurable steps. First, a cascaded integrator-comb ﬁlter 21 divides the sample
rate by an integer 1 ≤ ncic≤ 128. This is followed by two optional half-band decimators 5,
each accomplishing a rate division of 2 and antialias ﬁltering. Within their passbands these
ﬁlters have a linear phase/frequency dependence and thus are shape-preserving in the time-
domain. Figure 2 shows data acquired with typical settings, ncic = 25 and both half-band
7
ﬁlters enabled, which yields a decimation of ndec = 4ncic = 100 and νm/ndec = 106 samples
per second, requiring 32 Mbps of network and buﬀering resources. ADC quantization noise
power, which is nearly uniform in density (‘white’) over a Nyquist bandwidth of ±νm/2 is
reduced, approximately byn−1
dec (see Appendix B). The ﬁnal DSP section queues and formats
z(tk) along with metadata such as hardware time-stamping and drives their transmission
to a general-purpose data acquisition computer. Application programming interfaces are
available for several languages, free tools like gnuradio15, and commercial data processing
packages.
III. DEMONSTRATION EXPERIMENTS
We now outline our study of SDR’s suitability for oscillator metrology. We ﬁrst discuss
phase measurements over intervals of a few seconds, the analysis of which includes informa-
tion about fast ﬂuctuations up to νm/(2ndec) in frequency. Then, we consider measurement
noise over several hours to days using methods which average over fast ﬂuctuations. We ﬁnd
that over intervals greater than about 10 ms, ADC aperture jitter is likely a limiting tech-
nical noise source. We demonstrate a promising solution available in many SDRs: a second,
independent ADC channel is synchronously sampled such that aperture jitter and many
other noises subtract in common-mode. We consider application of SDR in a many-clock
inter-comparison, and to the problem of optical frequency and phase metrology. Finally,
we brieﬂy describe measurement performance of a 6 GHz microwave tone beyond the ADC
bandwidth, and the instability of amplitude measurements in two SDR models.
A. Phase of ADC input vs. the sampling timebase
Consider the arrangement in Figure 1b where fi is approximately known and stationary,
and fr is treated as a frequency reference ( fi need not be similar to fr). We choose the
integera sofa (see Eq. 2) is close to fi. Absent technical noise, νm = 10fr due to the master
timebase’s PLL, making fa exactly computable. The SDR output samples, z(tk), represent
the input signal spectrally shifted to a low frequency fb = fi−fa; the sample epochs are
tk =k× (ndec/νm). The signal phase, arg z(tk)≡ tan−1 [Im z(tk)/Re z(tk)] (see Figure 2c)
is a time-integral of angular frequency 2 πfb and so evolves in time as 2 πfbtk +φ0, where
8
a) 
b) 
Fourier frequency (Hz) 
10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5
Phase PSD (dBc/Hz) -160
-140
-120
-100
Free-running 
VCXO
ADC
Maser
c) 
Time deviation           (s) 
10 -5 10 -4 10 -3 10 -2 10 -1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 410 -14
10 -13
10 -12
Single ADC channel
Dual ADC channels
Averaging interval    (s) 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Phase (mrad.) -0.2
0
0.2
Sample time  (s) 
FIG. 3. a) Unwrapped phase signal argz(tk) whenfi andfr derive from the same 10 MHz oscillator
(0.1 mrad corresponds to ∆ T ≈ 1.6 ps); a deterministic ramp caused by the choice of fa is
removed. Here, ndec = 100. b) A Fourier transform of arg z(tk) (black data) yields a single-sided
phase noise power spectral density (PSD). At high Fourier frequencies we observe a white noise of
≈− 140 dBc/Hz (green dashed line), consistent with the ADC’s SNR, signal power, and decimation
ﬁltering. At low Fourier frequencies we observe technical noise roughly tracking the rising noise
density of theνm VCXO (red dashed line), which the PLL cannot fully suppress. A hydrogen maser
noise speciﬁcation (black dot-dash) provides context. The relative PSD between two ADC channels
(blue data) has much improved ﬂicker noise. c) Time deviation σx(τ) in one-channel (black) and
two-channel (blue) modes; ndec = 500. Solid points derive from short streams of arg z(tk) samples
without averaging. Open circles result from pre-averaging streams in 1 s chunks. White phase noise
of 1.2 fs (τ/1 s)−1/2 (black dashed line) is equivalent to≈ 86 dB SNR (see Appendix A). The blue
dashed line represents a further 6 dB improvement. A red dashed line marks the ADC’s aperture
jittertap. For τ≫ 10 s, we expect environmental coupling to dominate both measurement modes.
See text for further detail. 9
φ0 includes technical oﬀsets such as cable delays. The tan −1 function is evaluated with
independent numerator and denominator arguments, removing a phase-quadrant ambiguity.
Generally, all SDRs are capable of this mode of measurement, though those without the
ability to reference νm will suﬀer in accuracy.
To analyze the phase noise ﬂoor of this conﬁguration, we split a single 10 MHz oscillator
into the fi and fr inputs. The amplitude at the ADC is kept near half-scale to avoid
distortion (typical input power was≈ 0 dBm). Ideally, when unwrapped, argz(tk) = 2π(1−
10a/232)(kndec/10) (neglecting a ﬁxedφ0). In software, we subtract this deterministic trend,
the magnitude of which is made small by an appropriate choice of a, and interpret residual
ﬂuctuations as measurement noise. Figure 3a shows a typical residual phase signal, a Fourier
transform of which yields the phase noise power spectral density (Figure 3b).
The black curve in Figure 3c depicts a complementary statistical measure: the oscillator
time deviation2,4 σx(τ) = τ√
3mod σy(τ), where mod σy(τ) is the modiﬁed Allan deviation 35.
Brieﬂy,σx(τ) characterizes the predictability of phase (in time units, see Eq. 1) as a function
of averaging interval τ. Over roughly 20 µs < τ <200 µs we observe behavior consistent
with white-phase noise, σx(τ)≈ 1.2 fs (τ/1 s)−1/2. Regrettably, σx(τ) stops decreasing with
further averaging, and besides an oscillation peak (related to modulation at fb) appears lim-
ited to a ﬂicker-ﬂoor roughly consistent with the ADC’s tap = 150 fs. Reducing input power
increases the white-phase instability, but otherwise these performance limits persist over
many instrument conﬁgurations: rf-coupling method (dc-coupled op-amp vs. transformer),
choice of heterodyne fb, decimation factor ndec, stock vs. quiet linear power supply, etc.
B. Phase of one ADC channel vs. another
To do better we must reduce the inﬂuence of phase noise in νm and the ADC aperture
jitter tap. Fortunately, many SDRs can process two independent ADC channels which are
sampled synchronously (speciﬁcally, the two ADC channels exist on the same chip). To
examine residual noise in this diﬀerential conﬁguration, we split the same oscillator into
the three inputs (fi, fj, and fr) as shown in Figure 1c, though it is not crucial that the fr
input be identical to either of the others. Since fi =fj, the same NCO frequency fa is used
to DDC both channels, giving the same deterministic trend to both output phase signals.
The phase signals should be unwrapped before subtraction because, due to noise and small
10
phase oﬀsets, 2π-discontinuities can appear at diﬀerent sample epochs. Example single- and
dual-channel signal processing chains are illustrated for comparison in Figure 1d.
Blue curves in Figures 3b and 3c show the signiﬁcant improvement in phase noise and time
deviation from dual-channel operation. A ﬂicker-ﬂoor of σx≈ 20 fs now appears roughly
an order-of-magnitude below tap and persists over 1 ms < τ <500 s. It also improves by
an order-of-magnitude upon the typical noise ﬂoor of the DMTD instrument ( σx≈ 300 fs).
While we lack detailed knowledge of the ADC, we posit that each channel’s sample-and-
hold circuitry shares a trigger-input threshold-detector. After this element, circuit paths,
component/process variation, and environmental non-uniformity on the ADC chip are likely
minute. ADC voltage-reference ﬂuctuations and phase noise in theνm PLL (and its reference,
fr) are also highly common to both sampled channels. Remaining non-common elements
include oﬀ-chip transmission lines, coupling transformers, and on-chip ADC sampling cir-
cuitry. We show later that similar common-mode suppression is present in a diﬀerent ADC
with much larger tap = 1 ps.
In this mode of operation, it is less important thatνm be locked to a high-quality oscillator
because phase noise in νm will be highly-common between the two sampled inputs. Noise is
not completely suppressed, however. We found slightly better performance, at the level of
20 % inσx, whenνm was referenced to a hydrogen maser versus the SDR’s quartz oscillator.
We hypothesize that parasitic coupling of the digital sample clock atνm is slightly imbalanced
between the two ADC inputs. This feature is likely speciﬁc to the SDR model and circuit
layout.
C. Instability over long averaging intervals
Maximum decimation in an SDR still results in several megabits per second of data per
channel. As a practical matter for long-duration measurements, we reduce this data stream
as it is acquired to one recorded ∆ T value per second. This step reduces measurement
bandwidth to≈ 1 Hz. We tested two simple averaging methods with similar performance:
uniform weight (‘rectangular window’) averaging of arg z(tk) over groups of N = νm/ndec
samples per second, and the phase estimation routine discussed in Appendix A. Issues related
to windowed averaging here are analogous to those in frequency meters 37.
The SDR measurement stability does not degrade much over intervals of several hours, an
11
Time offset (ps) 
-100 
0
100 
200 
300 
400 
SDR 1ch. + 50 ps 
SDR 2ch. + 25 ps 
Commercial DMTD 
MJD - 57247 (days) 
1 2 3 4 5 6
Time offset (ps) 
-10 
-5 
0
5
10 
DMTD - SDR 1ch. 
DMTD - SDR 2ch. 
a) 
b) 
SDR “warm-up” 
transient 
Human activity 
near apparatus 
approx. 31 hours 
FIG. 4. a) A comparison of two hydrogen masers over ﬁve days (MJD is the modiﬁed Julian date),
using a commercial instrument based on DMTD (red) and the SDR described here (black/blue for
single-/dual-channel mode, respectively). From each time series we subtract a linear phase trend
corresponding to the masers’ frequency diﬀerence of y = 8.85× 10−14. We introduce 25 ps and
50 ps oﬀsets for visual clarity. b) We show the diﬀerences of each SDR measurement with that
of the DMTD. Some technical noise features are understood and annotated; it is not yet known
whether the DMTD, SDR, or both systems contribute to the ∼ 31 h periodic modulation.
important requirement for an atomic-clock measurement system26. We undertook no special
environmental stabilization beyond standard laboratory conditions (ambient temperature
control of≈ 0.5 K). The SDR operated in its original enclosure with a continuously active
cooling fan. For these tests, matched cables were ﬂexible, double-shielded (RD-316), and
SMA terminated. Open circles in Figure 3c show typical long-term performance of the one-
and two-channel SDR techniques. In terms of frequency instability, the two-channel ADC
residuals at 10 MHz typically average as ﬂicker-phase noise with σy(τ) = 7× 10−14(τ/1 s)−1
through τ = 103 s.
12
Averaging duration    (s) 
1 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5
Total Allan deviation 
10 -17 
10 -16 
10 -15 
10 -14 
10 -13 
Commercial DMTD (ST0014 vs. ST0010) 
Commercial DMTD residuals 
SDR 2-ch. (ST0014 vs. ST0010) 
SDR 2-ch. residuals 
SDR 1-ch. residuals 
FIG. 5. Fractional frequency instability 16 σy(τ) of hydrogen masers (NIST masers ST0014 vs.
ST0010) as measured by a DMTD commercial instrument (red, solid) and the SDR two-channel
technique (blue, solid) described here. From τ≥ 200 s both techniques become identically limited
by maser frequency ﬂuctuations. Open points show typical residual instabilities of the DMTD
instrument (red), the single-channel SDR method (black), and the two-channel SDR method (blue).
The blue dashed line is an eye guide placed at σy(τ) = 7× 10−14(τ/1 s)−1. Both DMTD and SDR
methods yield one datum per second, but the eﬀective measurement bandwidth of the DMTD
instrument is known to be ≫ 1 Hz.
D. Clock comparison with software radio
The tests described above demonstrate the low instability of the SDR technique; here
we discuss time accuracy. Two 5 MHz signals, sourced by hydrogen masers (NIST masers
ST0010 and ST0014), are input into the two SDR ADC channels. A non-linear frequency
doubler converted one of these to create the fr = 10 MHz PLL reference. The maser signals
were measured simultaneously by a commercial system based on DMTD. Figure 4a shows
excellent agreement between the methods. The time-series of the diﬀerence between the
13
data sets (Figure 4b) reveals technical noise in one or both measurement systems, some
details of which are not yet understood. An initial transient of about 15 ps in magnitude is
a repeatable ‘warm-up’ SDR characteristic lasting several minutes. Key component temper-
atures, measured with platinum resistive thermometers attached with thermally conductive
epoxy, increase by 5 K to 10 K in these ﬁrst several minutes of operation. We also observe
a periodic variation (of roughly 31 h) with an amplitude of order 5 ps. Such a variation
would contribute < 10−16 to fractional frequency instability, which is of marginal signiﬁ-
cance in the inter-comparison of maser clocks. Figure 5 shows the frequency instability of
the maser comparisons and typical SDR and DMTD residual instabilities. At averaging
intervals of τ≈ 103 s, the single-channel SDR technique is comparable with the commer-
cial DMTD instrument; the two-channel SDR technique outperforms both by almost an
order-of-magnitude.
E. Multi-channel operation
Some commercial DMTD instruments accept 16 or more input oscillators, where one
channel is permanently assigned a special role as reference for the TIC timebase νm. The
two-channel SDR scheme presented here is scalable to an unlimited number of channels,
and it is possible but not necessary that one oscillator be assigned a special role. Figure 6a
sketches a scheme whereby multiple SDR instruments are arranged in a ‘ring,’ immune to any
single oscillator or SDR fault. A ‘hub’ model (Figure 6b), where one oscillator is distributed
to all measurement nodes is also possible. Simultaneous implementation of the one-channel
SDR technique using a distinct fr oscillator provides a ‘backup hub’ mode of operation
with degraded performance. In a scaled deployment, it may be desirable to increase the
decimation performed in hardware, perform the phase computation and averaging itself
in the FPGA, and/or distribute the software data processing among multiple connected
computers. We estimate that, per measurement channel, the material cost of a SDR solution
is a factor of two or more below competitive multi-channel DMTD instruments.
14
SDR 0 
0 1 2 3 m 0
SDR 1 SDR 2 
... 
... 
SDR m 
a)  Multiple SDRs: ring configuration 
b)  Multiple SDRs: hub configuration with backup 
SDR 0 
0
SDR 1 SDR 2 
... 
... 
SDR m-1 
12 3 m
FIG. 6. Multiple SDRs can scale for coherent many-oscillator comparisons in ﬂexible arrangements,
the choice of which will depend on which failure modes are judged most likely. a) For example, in
a ‘ring’ conﬁguration, each SDR node produces the two-channel diﬀerential signal fj−fi, a one-
channel signalfi−fr and unique one-channel residualfj−fr. Phase data collection for all oscillators
is uninterrupted with any single node failure. b) In a ‘hub’ conﬁguration, the oscillator indexed ‘0’
is distributed to an ADC channel in each node as part of a two-channel diﬀerential measurement.
To protect the network against failure of oscillator ‘0’, oscillator ‘1’ provides a shared PLL reference
to all nodes, enabling one-channel measurements of all oscillators as a ‘degraded backup’. Here,
junctions imply distinct distribution ampliﬁer channels; diﬀerential ampliﬁer and cable delays must
be accounted for when comparing oscillator phase diﬀerences.
F. Optical oscillator measurement
Optical atomic frequency references now exceed the performance of oﬃcial primary stan-
dards based on microwave frequencies by factors of 1000 in stability 20 and potentially 100
in accuracy 6,19,46. Generally, optical frequency references operate by disciplining a pre-
stabilized laser oscillator to an atomic resonance in neutral atoms or single trapped ions 32.
Direct phase and frequency comparisons between two lasers at fα and fβ are only possi-
ble if they are suﬃciently close to create a heterodyne beatnote on a photodiode or other
transducer. Otherwise, a now standard technique employs a broadband femtosecond laser
frequency comb (FLFC, or comb) as a common heterodyne oscillator spanning hundreds of
15
Amplitude (mV) 
-50 
0
50 
Sample time (ms) 
0 20 40 60 80 100 -50 
0
50 
Sample time (s) 
0 1 2 3 4 5
Time offset (fs) -5 
0
5
a) 
b) 
c) 
FIG. 7. Tracking optical phase with SDR (see text for details). a) The SDR down-converts a
heterodyne between a femtosecond laser frequency comb (FLFC) stabilized to reference laser fα,
and laser fβ to an audio tone of ≈ 140 Hz. We plot the complex components of the SDR output
z(tk). b) Laser β is transmitted to the FLFC heterodyne via an uncompensated ﬁber optic link.
By shaking the ﬁber, we observe and can coherently track resulting phase ﬂuctuations. c) Dividing
argz(tk) by 2 πfβ, we cast phase ﬂuctuations as time instability of the optical oscillator β. A
constant phase and frequency oﬀset are suppressed in the plot.
terahertz30,45. A FLFC spectrum consists of many optical modes, whose absolute frequen-
cies can be expressed as fn = nfrep +fceo for many thousands of consecutive integers n.
The comb’s pulse repetition rate, frep, scales inversely with the laser resonator length, and
|fceo| < frep depends on the details of the intra-cavity dispersion. For our purposes, it is
suﬃcient to note that both degrees of freedom correspond to radio frequencies controllable
by phase-lock techniques.
We measured and tracked phase ﬂuctuations between two laser oscillators using a FLFC
and the SDR. A Ti:sapphire FLFC 13 with frep≈ 1 GHz was stabilized by locking a comb
mode 640 MHz oﬀset from an ultra-stable optical frequency fα≈ 259 THz. We used self-
referencing interferometry 10 to stabilize fceo. A second ultra-stable laser 14, fβ≈ 282 THz,
interfered with another comb mode to make a heterodyne tone fo near 160 MHz on an
ampliﬁed photodiode. Independent characterizations have determined frequency instability
16
ﬂoors of ≤ 2× 10−16 for laser α and 1 × 10−15 for laser β. Due to the comb’s phase
locks, ﬂuctuations of fo are directly related to the ﬂuctuations between the α and β laser
oscillators; the required comb mode integers for absolute determinations can be obtained by
low-resolution wavemeter measurements of fα and fβ.
Traditionally, only gated frequency measurements are made offo, discarding information
about phase ﬂuctuations. A DMTD scheme to track phase is impractical: generally, fo can
appear at any frequency up to frep/2 depending on FLFC preparation, and fo ﬂuctuations
and drift are typically too large. In contrast, the SDR has a high input bandwidth, a tunable
NCO for down-converting arbitraryfo, and tracks phase information over very short intervals
νm/ndec≤ 5 µs with no dead time.
Since the ADC sample clock νm = 100 MHz, fo≈ 160 MHz appears in the third ±νm/2
Nyquist zone, aliased to−40.005 860 MHz. We set the NCOfa =−40.006 000 MHz in order
to obtain an audio beat note |fb|≈ 140 Hz. Figure 7a shows the output sample data under
normal conditions; Figure 7b shows directly observable phase noise created by vigorously
shaking the uncompensated 27 ﬁber optics coupling laser β to the comb. It is important
to appreciate that a radian of optical phase remains unscaled by mixing with the comb to
makefo, nor is it scaled by the DDC process fo→fb in the SDR. So, treating laser α as a
reference, we can derive the time ﬂuctuations of laser β by unwrapping and dividing the fb
phase argz(tk) by a factor 2π× 282 THz, following Eq. 1. Figure 7c shows the result: well-
resolved femtosecond-level temporal instability between two would-be optical clocks, lasers
α and β. In measurement of optical heterodyne tones, the SDR noise ﬂoor is negligible.
A multi-channel SDR arrangement monitoring several FLFC heterodyne beat notes could
form the measurement basis for an optical time scale , meaning an ensemble of optical os-
cillators statistically weighted to produce a robust and reliable ‘average clock’ 26,43. Related
technology is approaching a high level of readiness, including robust ﬁber-FLFC designs 40,
stabilized ‘ﬂywheel’ lasers18,24 with frequency instabilitiesσy≤ 1×10−16, and optical atomic
standards characterized at the 10−18 uncertainty level6.
G. Microwave frequencies
Microwave frequencies far beyond the ADC input bandwidth are measurable by SDR
models that incorporate an analog mixer and microwave local-oscillator (LO) synthesizer ref-
17
a) b) 
5 MHz 
5 MHz 6 GHz 
6 GHz 
FIG. 8. a) Time deviation of diﬀerential phase measurements of 5 MHz and 6 GHz signals. For
5 MHz, the SDR featured a 12-bit ADC with 1 ps aperture jitter. The instability ﬂoor is more than
two orders of magnitude lower thantap, indicating excellent common-mode suppression of technical
noise. For 6 GHz, the SDR featured a LO synthesizer and analog mixer front-end to translate the
signal into the ADC bandwidth. Though phase-noise performance is made worse by these elements,
the high signal frequency leads to a time stability ﬂoor of 1 fs, roughly an order-of-magnitude better
than the results at 10 MHz (Figure 3c). b) We also investigated amplitude measurement instability
(normalized to input amplitude) of two-channel signals in these SDR models. In both plots, data
at longer τ are obtained by additional software decimation by a factor of 2500 prior to storage.
These data were acquired in an unstabilized oﬃce environment and with the sample clock νm
un-referenced. Shaded bands indicate standard statistical uncertainties.
erenced to the same source asνm. In a separate investigation, we tested a SDR (Ettus USRP
B210) featuring such a front-end (Analog Devices AD9361) capable of down-converting two
≤ 6 GHz signals before sampling them at 12-bit resolution. To characterize its phase-noise
performance, we input a 6 GHz (−22 dBm) signal and set the SDR’s programmable ampli-
ﬁers to 49 dB to use the full ADC range. νm was set to 30.72 MHz, and ndec to 32. Due
to the mixer front-end, we observed signiﬁcantly higher phase noise than the results in sec-
tion III B: a white noise ﬂoor at −123 dBc/Hz and ﬂicker noise of−90 dBc/Hz (f/1 Hz)−1.
However, given the much higher carrier frequency, the equivalent time deviation limits were
σx(τ) = 20 as (τ/1 s)−1/2 over short intervals and a ﬂicker ﬂoor of 1 fs, as shown in Figure 8a.
18
H. Amplitude metrology
Though we have so far ignored it, the amplitude of a complex sampled SDR signal is
also available as
√
I 2(tk) +Q2(tk). In a separate investigation, we studied the relative
amplitude instability limit of signals input into two ADC channels. We tested a SDR (Ettus
USRP B100) with a 12-bit ADC (Analog Devices AD9862), νm = 64 MHz, ndec = 64, and
fi =fj = 5 MHz. As shown in Figure 8b, we observed a relative amplitude instability ﬂoor
of 3×10−7 over the averaging interval 0.1 s≤τ≤ 100 s. The 6 GHz conﬁguration, described
in section III G, achieved an amplitude instability ﬂoor of 5 × 10−5.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Generally, SDR receivers are little more than high-speed signal samplers followed by a
series of digital ﬁlters designed to reduce data rate and noise bandwidth. However, these few
ingredients are suﬃcient for several recipes in high-precision time and frequency metrology.
Phase/time-oﬀset measurements using unmodiﬁed SDR hardware can exceed the stability
performance of a commercially-available instrument based on the classic DMTD design while
oﬀering increased ﬂexibility. SDR measurement of phase using two input channels diﬀeren-
tially reduces the inﬂuence of technical timing noise and has demonstrated a maser clock
frequency resolution σy≤ 10−16 within 10 3 s of averaging. Over several days of continuous
hydrogen maser measurement, the SDR technique appears highly accurate, with relatively
low environmental noise coupling in a typical laboratory environment. SDR hardware is
scalable to coherently measure any number of oscillators at almost any radio or microwave
frequency. We have shown the SDR can resolve relative oscillator amplitude ﬂuctuations
below the part-per-million level. Finally, we have demonstrated that SDR can be usefully
employed in the comparison of ultra-stable optical clocks and oscillators by measuring het-
erodyne products of clocks with a femtosecond laser frequency comb.
Useful extensions of this work could include a long-term frequency comparison of atomic-
clocks’ output signals at multiple frequencies (e.g., 5 MHz and 100 MHz), and integration
of a many-channel fast ADC into an SDR architecture for better multi-channel scalability.
Alternatively, the transmission functions of the SDR could be employed in active phase-noise
compensation in optical or FLFC interferometry applications.
19
NIST’s Time and Frequency Division funded this investigation. The work is a contribu-
tion of NIST and not subject to U.S. copyright. The authors thank Judah Levine for helpful
discussions, Joshua Savory (maser comparisons), Franklyn Quinlan (FLFC measurements),
and Roger Brown for careful reading of the manuscript.
Appendix A: Spectral estimation of frequency and phase
In the single-channel setup of Figure 1b, a fi known only to within a Nyquist bandwidth
νm/2 can be quickly acquired by seeking high spectral power while scanning the NCOfa over
its full range. Without loss of generality, we suppose fi < νm/2 and choose the calculable
NCO frequencyfa such that|fi−fa|≪ νm/ndec; in other words, the DDC frequency must be
within the decimated Nyquist zone. The sign of the sampled ‘beatnote’ fb =fi−fa is ﬁxed
by the sense of temporal phase rotation inz(tk), or equivalently, the phase relationship of its
real and imaginary components. The problem of high resolution determination of fi reduces
to spectral estimation on groups of N samples of z(tk) to estimate fb. Though no closed-
form solution exists generally for spectral estimation 23, our circumstances are unusually
favorable: z(tk) consists of a single, low-frequency tonefb, with high SNR and little harmonic
distortion. Though computationally intensive, an optimal un-biased frequency estimator
given these assumptions is the argument ˆfb maximizing the basic periodogram function 41
|P (f)|2, where
P (f) = 1
N
N−1∑
k=0
z(tk)e−i2πft k. (A1)
For signals like ours,|P (f)| is well-approximated by a quadratic polynomial near its maxi-
mum. We therefore implemented Brent’s method of one-dimension parabolic interpolation33
to eﬃciently search for ˆfb. A lower resolution FFT-based spectral estimator seeds this non-
linear search with an initial guess. Unlike such FFT-based methods, no windowing function
or zero-padding must be applied to the sampled data prior to |P (f)|2 maximization, and
there is no need to makeN a power-of-2. The search also yields an optimal estimator for the
single-tone amplitude, ˆAb =|P ( ˆfb)|. In the limit of high SNR and spectrally-uniform uncor-
related (‘white’) noise, periodogram maximizing spectral estimates converge with maximum
likelihood and non-linear least-squares ﬁt results.
Figure 5 (black open circles) shows measured frequency instability of a fi =fr = 10 MHz
20
signal, which surpasses that of a commercial frequency meter of comparable cost. Impor-
tantly, note that the SDR measurement instability decreases as τ−1, compared to many
frequency meters’ instability∝τ−1/2. This diﬀerence is attributable to non-zero dead-time
and frequency quantization in commercial meter readings. The interval N(νm/ndec)−1 is
analogous to a ‘gate interval’ of a traditional frequency meter. With SDR, this parameter
may be chosen during or after data acquisition since z(tk) data can be stored. Barring
interruption in data transmission, this method of frequency analysis has zero ‘dead-time’
intervals during which the input oscillations are unmeasured.
We continue the spectral estimation method to determine phase oﬀset measurements from
sets of N complex waveform samplesz(tk). If unknown, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the ˆfb maximizing the
periodogram function|P (f)|2 from Eq. A1. Then, the optimal estimate of the signal’s phase
is
ˆφb = tan−1
[
Im P ( ˆfb)
Re P ( ˆfb)
]
. (A2)
Successive estimates of phase on continuously sampled data will evolve as
ˆφb(tk) =φ0 + 2πfbtk (A3)
=φ0 + 2π(fi−fr)tk + 2πfr
(
1− νm
fr
a
232
)
tk, (A4)
where φ0 is the initial phase oﬀset and, for the SDR described in section II B, νm/fr = 10.
The ﬁnal term, the result of our choosing a heterodyne oﬀset frequency, is exactly computable
in terms of fr and is removable in post-processing. Subtracting it using complex phase
rotation neatly avoids 2π discontinuities, leaving us only with a phase growing linearly with
the frequency diﬀerence of interest fi−fr. Phase discontinuities must still be expected and
handled over time intervals τ ≥ 2π/(fi−fr). The variance of a single ˆφb estimate using
N≫ 1 samples is bounded by 23
var
(
ˆφb
)
≥ 1
SNR
2
N. (A5)
As SNR∝ 1/N itself (due to process gain), the bound for variance in the phase estimator
is independent of the sample density N under optimal noise conditions, remaining inversely
proportional to the SNR and total observation duration. Combining this result with Eq. 1,
the resulting theoretical bound on time deviation 42 is
σx(τ) = 1
2πfi
√
var( ˆφb)≥ 1.2× 10−15 s (τ/1 s)−1/2, (A6)
21
TABLE I. Decimating low-pass ﬁlters in the SDR ideally improve SNR proportionally to the
decimation factor ndec. We a slightly worse empirical scaling ∝ n0.8
dec. Here we compare the
measured SNR for a constant, half-scale, fi =fr = 10 MHz maser-referenced tone under diﬀerent
decimation settings. fb≈ 8 Hz; other choices yielded similar results.
ndec Expected SNR (dB) Observed SNR (dB) Excess noise (dB)
20 81.5 74.5 7.0
40 84.5 76.7 7.8
100 88.5 79.8 8.7
200 91.5 82.1 9.4
500 95.5 85.2 10.3
where fi = 10 MHz, N = 10 6 samples per second, and the eﬀective SNR ≈ 86 dB (see
Appendix B). Observations in Figure 3 (black solid points) are consistent with this noise
limit over short averaging intervals.
Appendix B: Decimation ﬁdelity in practice
Ideally, in the presence of uniform Gaussian noise, the SNR of ADC samples should be
improved by a factor of the decimation ratio ndec since the CIC and half-band decimating
ﬁlters approximate an ideal low-pass ﬁlter. Alternatively, with SNR is expressed in dB,
SNR(ideally observed) = SNRADC + 10 logndec. (B1)
However, ﬁnite precision in the numerical ﬁlters, and the presence of non-Gaussian noise,
such as spurs and input noise near the sample clockνm, result in slightly worse performance.
We observe an approximate n0.8
dec improvement with 20≤ndec≤ 500 as shown in Table I.
REFERENCES
1Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identiﬁed in this paper for
informational purposes only. Such identiﬁcation does not imply recommendation or en-
dorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that
the materials or equipment identiﬁed are necessarily the best available for the purpose.
22
2David W Allan and James Barnes. A modiﬁed ‘Allan Variance’ with increased oscillator
characterization ability. InThirty Fifth Annual Frequency Control Symposium. 1981, pages
470–475. IEEE, 1981.
3David W Allan and Howard Daams. Picosecond time diﬀerence measurement system. In
29th Annual Symposium on Frequency Control , volume 1, pages 404–411, 1975.
4DW Allan and H Hellwig. Time deviation and time prediction error for clock speciﬁca-
tion, characterization, and application. In IEEE 1978 Position Location and Navigation
Symposium, volume 1, pages 29–36, 1978.
5Maurice G Bellanger, Jacques L Daguet, and Guy P Lepagnol. Interpolation, extrapola-
tion, and reduction of computation speed in digital ﬁlters. Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, IEEE Transactions on, 22(4):231–235, 1974.
6BJ Bloom, TL Nicholson, JR Williams, SL Campbell, M Bishof, X Zhang, W Zhang,
SL Bromley, and J Ye. An optical lattice clock with accuracy and stability at the 10 −18
level. Nature, 506(7486):71–75, 2014.
7G Brida. High resolution frequency stability measurement system. Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments, 73(5):2171–2174, 2002.
8Andrea C Cardenas-Olaya, Enrico Rubiola, Jean-M Friedt, Massimo Ortolano, Salvatore
Micalizio, and Claudio E Calosso. Simple method for ADC characterization under the
frame of digital PM and AM noise measurement. In Frequency Control Symposium &
the European Frequency and Time Forum (FCS), 2015 Joint Conference of the IEEE
International, pages 676–680. IEEE, 2015.
9Gilles Cibiel, Myrianne R´ egis, Eric Tournier, and Oliver Llopis. AM noise impact on low
level phase noise measurements. Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, IEEE
Transactions on, 49(6):784–788, 2002.
10Steven T Cundiﬀ and Jun Ye. Colloquium: Femtosecond optical frequency combs.Reviews
of Modern Physics , 75(1):325, 2003.
11Ettus Research circuit schematics and technical information. http://files.ettus.com/.
12Ettus Research code repository. https://github.com/EttusResearch/uhd.
13Tara M Fortier, Albrecht Bartels, and Scott A Diddams. Octave-spanning Ti:Sapphire
laser with a repetition rate> 1 GHz for optical frequency measurements and comparisons.
Optics Letters, 31(7):1011–1013, 2006.
23
14TM Fortier, A Rolland, F Quinlan, FN Baynes, AJ Metcalf, A Hati, A Ludlow, N Hinkley,
M Shimizu, T Ishibashi, et al. Digital-photonic synthesis of ultra-low noise tunable signals
from RF to 100 GHz. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.03095 , 2015.
15GNURadio team. GNURadio: the free and open software radio ecosystem. http://
gnuradio.org/.
16Charles Greenhall, Dave Howe, and Donald B Percival. Total variance, an estimator of
long-term frequency stability. Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, IEEE
Transactions on, 46(5):1183–1191, 1999.
17J Grove, J Hein, J Retta, P Schweiger, W Solbrig, and SR Stein. Direct-digital phase-noise
measurement. In Frequency Control Symposium and Exposition, 2004. Proceedings of the
2004 IEEE International , pages 287–291. IEEE, 2004.
18Sebastian H¨ afner, Stephan Falke, Christian Grebing, Stefan Vogt, Thomas Legero, Mikko
Merimaa, Christian Lisdat, and Uwe Sterr. 8×10−17 fractional laser frequency instability
with a long room-temperature cavity. Optics Letters, 40(9):2112–2115, 2015.
19Thomas P Heavner, Elizabeth A Donley, Filippo Levi, Giovanni Costanzo, Thomas E
Parker, Jon H Shirley, Neil Ashby, Stephan Barlow, and SR Jeﬀerts. First accuracy
evaluation of NIST-F2. Metrologia, 51(3):174, 2014.
20N Hinkley, JA Sherman, NB Phillips, M Schioppo, ND Lemke, K Beloy, M Pizzo-
caro, CW Oates, and AD Ludlow. An atomic clock with 10 −18 instability. Science,
341(6151):1215–1218, 2013.
21Eugene Hogenauer. An economical class of digital ﬁlters for decimation and interpolation.
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on , 29(2):155–162, 1981.
22James Jespersen and Jane Fitz-Randolph. From sundials to atomic clocks: understanding
time and frequency. Courier Corporation, 1999.
23SM Kay. Modern spectral estimation: theory and application. 1988 . Prentice Hall, 1999.
24T Kessler, C Hagemann, C Grebing, T Legero, U Sterr, F Riehle, MJ Martin, L Chen,
and J Ye. A sub-40-mhz-linewidth laser based on a silicon single-crystal optical cavity.
Nature Photonics, 6(10):687–692, 2012.
25G Paul Landis, Ivan Galysh, and Thomas Petsopoulos. A new digital phase measurement
system. Technical report, DTIC Document, 2001.
26Judah Levine. Invited review article: The statistical modeling of atomic clocks and the
design of time scales. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments , 83(2):021101, 2012.
24
27Long-Sheng Ma, Peter Jungner, Jun Ye, and John L Hall. Delivering the same optical
frequency at two places: accurate cancellation of phase noise introduced by an optical ﬁber
or other time-varying path. Optics Letters, 19(21):1777–1779, 1994.
28Joe Mitola. The software radio architecture. Communications Magazine, IEEE, 33(5):26–
38, 1995.
29Ken Mochizuki, Masaharu Uchino, and Takao Morikawa. Frequency-stability measure-
ment system using high-speed ADCs and digital signal processing. Instrumentation and
Measurement, IEEE Transactions on, 56(5):1887–1893, 2007.
30Nathan R Newbury. Searching for applications with a ﬁne-tooth comb. Nature Photonics,
5(4):186–188, 2011.
31Joel Phillips and Ken Kundert. Noise in mixers, oscillators, samplers, and logic an intro-
duction to cyclostationary noise. In Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, 2000. CICC.
Proceedings of the IEEE 2000 , pages 431–438. IEEE, 2000.
32N Poli, CW Oates, P Gill, and GM Tino. Optical atomic clocks. Rivista del Nuovo
Cimento, 36(12), 2013.
33William H Press, Saul A Teukolsky, William T Vetterling, and Brian P Flannery. Numer-
ical recipes in C, volume 2. Cambridge university press, 1996.
34Ivan Prochazka, Petr Panek, and Jan Kodet. Note: Precise phase and frequency com-
parator based on direct phase-time measurements. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments ,
85(12):126110, 2014.
35WJ Riley. Handbook of frequency stability analysis. Technical report, 2008.
36Stefania R¨ omisch, Steven R Jeﬀerts, and Thomas E Parker. A digital time scale at the
National Institute for Standards and Technology. In General Assembly and Scientiﬁc
Symposium, 2011 XXXth URSI , pages 1–4. IEEE, 2011.
37Enrico Rubiola. On the measurement of frequency and of its sample variance with high-
resolution counters. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments , 76(5):4703, 2005.
38Enrico Rubiola and Fran¸ cois Vernotte. The cross-spectrum experimental method. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1003.0113, 2010.
39Laura B Ruppalt, David R McKinstry, Keir C Lauritzen, Albert K Wu, Shawn Phillips,
Salvador H Talisa, et al. Simultaneous digital measurement of phase and amplitude noise.
In Frequency Control Symposium (FCS), 2010 IEEE International , pages 97–102. IEEE,
2010.
25
40Laura C Sinclair, Ian Coddington, William C Swann, Greg B Rieker, Archita Hati, Kana
Iwakuni, and Nathan R Newbury. Operation of an optically coherent frequency comb
outside the metrology lab. Optics Express, 22(6):6996–7006, 2014.
41Petre Stoica and Randolph L Moses. Spectral analysis of signals . Pearson/Prentice Hall
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005.
42Donald Barrett Sullivan, David W Allan, David A Howe, and Fred L Walls. Charac-
terization of clocks and oscillators . US Department of Commerce, National Institute of
Standards and Technology, 1990.
43Patrizia Tavella and Claudine Thomas. Comparative study of time scale algorithms.
Metrologia, 28(2):57, 1991.
44Masaharu Uchino and Ken Mochizuki. Frequency stability measuring technique using
digital signal processing. Electronics and Communications in Japan (Part I: Communica-
tions), 87(1):21–33, 2004.
45Th Udem, Ronald Holzwarth, and Theodor W H¨ ansch. Optical frequency metrology.
Nature, 416(6877):233–237, 2002.
46Ichiro Ushijima, Masao Takamoto, Manoj Das, Takuya Ohkubo, and Hidetoshi Katori.
Cryogenic optical lattice clocks. Nature Photonics, 9(3):185–189, 2015.
47Jack E Volder. The CORDIC trigonometric computing technique. Electronic Computers,
IRE Transactions on, EC-8(3):330–334, 1959.
48L ˇSojdr, J ˇCerm´ ak, and R Barillet. Optimization of dual-mixer time-diﬀerence multiplier.
In Frequency and Time Forum, 2004. EFTF 2004. 18th European , pages 588–594. IET,
2004.
49Fred L Walls and David W Allan. Measurements of frequency stability. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 74(1):162–168, 1986.
26