Readout for intersatellite laser interferometry: Measuring low frequency phase
ﬂuctuations of HF signals with microradian precision
Oliver Gerberding, 1, a) Christian Diekmann, 1, b) Joachim Kullmann, 1 Michael Tr¨ obs,1
Ioury Bykov, 1 Simon Barke,1 Nils Christopher Brause, 1 Juan Jos´ e Esteban Delgado,1
Thomas S. Schwarze, 1 Jens Reiche, 1 Karsten Danzmann, 1 Torben Rasmussen,2 Torben
Vendt Hansen, 2 Anders Engaard, 2 Søren Møller Pedersen, 3 Oliver Jennrich, 4 Martin
Suess,4 Zoran Sodnik, 4 and Gerhard Heinzel 1
1)Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics, and Institute for Gravitational
Physics of the Leibniz Universit¨ at Hannover, Callinstrasse 38, 30167 Hannover,
Germany
2)Axcon ApS, Diplomvej 381, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
3)DTU Space, National Space Institute, The Technical University of Denmark,
Elektrovej 327, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
4)European Space Research and Technology Centre, European Space Agency,
Keplerlaan 1, 2200 AG Noordwijk, The Netherlands
(Dated: 24 September 2018)
1
arXiv:1504.08266v1  [physics.ins-det]  30 Apr 2015
Precision phase readout of optical beat note signals is one of the core techniques
required for intersatellite laser interferometry. Future space based gravitational wave
detectors like eLISA require such a readout over a wide range of MHz frequencies,
due to orbit induced Doppler shifts, with a precision in the order of µrad/
√
Hz at
frequencies between 0.1 mHz and 1 Hz. In this paper, we present phase readout sys-
tems, so-called phasemeters, that are able to achieve such precisions and we discuss
various means that have been employed to reduce noise in the analogue circuit do-
main and during digitisation. We also discuss the inﬂuence of some non-linear noise
sources in the analogue domain of such phasemeters. And ﬁnally, we present the
performance that was achieved during testing of the elegant breadboard model of the
LISA phasemeter, that was developed in the scope of an ESA technology development
activity.
Keywords: phase measurement, laser interferometry, instrumentation
Submitted to Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments
a)contact@olivergerberding.com; Present address: National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithers-
burg, Maryland 20899, USA & Joint Quantum Institute, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland
20741, USA
b)Present address: SpaceTech GmbH, Seelbachstraße, 88090 Immenstaad am Bodensee, Germany
2
I. INTRODUCTION
Inter satellite laser interferometers are studied for space based gravitational wave detec-
tors, like LISA, eLISA 1, and for satellite based geodesy missions, like GRACE Follow-On 2.
The orbit conﬁgurations of these missions lead to relative velocities of the spacecrafts, in the
order of 10 m/s, that cause Doppler shifts of the laser beams that are transmitted between
any two satellites. To accommodate these, a heterodyne detection scheme using readout
systems with suﬃciently large bandwidth, in the order of 25 MHz (at a laser wavelength
of λ0 = 1064 nm) is the current baseline technique. Digital phase readout systems using
all digital phase-locked loops (ADPLL), similar to GPS receivers, have been developed and
utilised in various laboratories 3–8.
The most critical aspect of these readout systems, also called phasemeters, is their phase
noise performance over long time scales (1000 s), i.e. mHz Fourier frequencies. Especially
the requirements for a future LISA like mission are very stringent. A noise ﬂoor below
2πµ rad/
√
Hz has to be achieved at frequencies between 5 mHz and 1 Hz, with a relaxed per-
formance requirement below 5 mHz (described by a noise shape function NSF(f) ). This cor-
responds roughly to a precision of 1 ppm of the laser wavelength and translates to 1 pm/
√
Hz
of eﬀective optical path length change noise ﬂoor.
We have constructed a number of phasemeter prototypes that achieve such noise levels.
This in particular includes a full breadboard model of the LISA phasemeter, developed in
the scope of an ESA technology development activity 9,10, shown in Figure 1. Each of these
prototypes utilises a distinct implementation of the analogue part of the phase readout
chain, which is one of the most critical and challenging elements of the metrology. Due to
our investigations we have gained detailed insight into the relevant eﬀects and in this article
we report our current best understanding of them, together with experimental results that
demonstrate the desired performance levels.
A. Phase readout chain overview
To set the stage for our investigation we describe here shortly the core metrology chain
for the phase readout in intersatellite interferometry, sketched in Figure 2. For readabil-
ity we omit an introduction of the optical set-ups, which can be found in various related
3
FIG. 1. Photograph of the assembled elegant breadboard model of the LISA phasemeter. The
system consists of one main board, one clock module, one DAC module and up to ﬁve ADC
modules9. A total of 20 readout channels, 4 analogue control outputs, eight FPGAs and an ultra-
stable clock and pilot tone distribution are included.
publications2,11,12.
The starting point of our description is an optical beat note with a frequency between
about 1 MHz and 25 MHz (the exact numbers depend on the individual mission and its
design) that is sent to a photo diode (PD). The frequency and phase of this beat note contain
the desired information about length and attitude ﬂuctuations (by diﬀerential wavefront
sensing, DWS)13 sensed by the interferometer. The PD is usually integrated with a trans-
impedance ampliﬁer (TIA), that converts the photo current into a voltage, and, together,
they form an active photo receiver (PR) 14. These devices are placed either directly in the
interferometer or close by. Their outputs are usually single-ended analogue signals that are
fed through coaxial cables to the phasemeter.
The phasemeter can, conceptually, be split into two parts: First, the signal condition-
ing in the analogue front-end (AFE) and the signal digitisation in the analogue-to-digital
converter (ADC). Second, the deterministic digital signal processing (DSP) performed in
4
FPGA+CPUPhasemeter
ADCTIA
PD
cable
AFE ADPLL
ﬁlter
IFO PR
FIG. 2. Schematic overview of the phase readout chain. This article focuses on the elements marked
green. The interferometer (IFO) signal is detected by a photo receiver (PR), which consists of a
photo diode (PD) and a trans-impedance ampliﬁer (TIA). The phasemeter receives and conditions
the incoming signals in the analogue-front end (AFE) and then digitises it in the analogue-to-
digital converter (ADC). A combination of Field programmable gate arrays (FPGA)s and a central
processing unit (CPU) extracts the signal phase via an all-digital phase-locked loop (ADPLL) and
post processes the data for storage or further use.
FPGAs and CPUs that consists mainly of ADPLLs, appropriate ﬁltering, decimation and
signal combination.
The DSP units inside the phasemeter have already been described and investigated in
detail3,4 and will not be discussed further in this article. Based on this earlier work, we
assume that the noise in the measurements shown below is not caused by artefacts in the
DSP. However, for some of the later described, not-yet understood eﬀects, an inﬂuence of
the DSP can not be fully excluded at the current time.
The classiﬁcation of the AFE as part of the phasemeter is arbitrary. All of the components
can, in principle, also be part of the photo receiver or any other separate element in between
the actual photo diode and the analogue-to-digital converter. The described analogue circuit
eﬀects are also present in the PR, however, they are often investigated separately, because PR
are required in higher numbers, they have heritage from commercially available components
and they operate in a diﬀerent environment, close or on the optical benches, with, for
example, better thermal stability. The concept of building independent PRs, that send
single-ended signals to the phasemeter through an impedance matched cable has been widely
used and is the basis for the discussions in this article. Alternatives that use diﬀerential signal
distribution, digitisation directly on the photo receiver, and stand-alone analogue-front-ends
that are separated physically from the digital components of the phasemeter are possible
5
but were discarded so far, due to concerns regarding thermal design, power consumption
and overall complexity. The strong inﬂuence of temperature ﬂuctuations, described later
in this article, might lead to a revision of these design principles for future studies and
implementations.
B. Article structure
We begin our review with a conceptual discussion of the signal digitisation in the ADC
(Section II). This is necessary to understand the requirements that drive the design of the
AFE. The derived structure of the AFE is described next, together with a set of known noise
sources (Section III). We then discuss non-linear eﬀects in the AFE that can also limit the
performance (Section IV).
The standard test procedure and a set of experiments using a combination of commer-
cial hardware, and in-house produced components is presented to demonstrate successful
implementations that were, however, limited in input frequency range. (Section V).
Next, we present the results of phase noise investigations of a breadboard model of the
LISA phasemeter in Section VI, where realistic, LISA-like analogue input signals were used.
This is accompanied with an overview of an active temperature stabilisation that was im-
plemented to achieve, for the ﬁrst time, full performance for signal frequencies of up to
25 MHz.
II. ANALOGUE-TO-DIGITAL CONVERSION
The interferometer signals need to be digitised with suﬃcient precision and rate. The two
most critical sampling parameters are the sampling frequency fs and the ADC bit depth N.
A. Truncation noise
Quantisation noise induced by digitisation is often modelled as white additive noise, an
assumption that, given the complex, noisy input signal characteristics expected in LISA like
missions, is assumed to be appropriate15. The eﬀective phase noise level due the quantisation
noise depends not only on the sampling parameters3,7, but also strongly on the ratio between
6
the signal peak amplitudevs and the maximum ADC input voltage rangevADC. The eﬀective
phase noise ˜ϕtrunc, due to truncation, can be written as 4
˜ϕtrunc = vADC
vs
2−N
√3fs
. (1)
Here, the largest possible signal before the occurrence of clipping and lowest phase noise
corresponds to vs = vADC/2. Truncation, therefore, induces the need for proper signal
gain conditioning in the AFE. The eﬀective levels during digitisation should be as high as
possible to minimise truncation noise inﬂuence, but they should also be small enough to
avoid clipping. One should note, that the corresponding maximum signal calculation has to
take additive input noise and additional tones into account.
B. Aliasing
During the sampling process any signals above the Nyquist frequency ( fs/2) are folded
into the baseband. This does not only apply to coherent signals, but also to noise. This
is a critical factor, since it means that additive noise sources, like, for example, photon
shot noise, that have a bandwidth larger than fs/2, will accumulate after digitisation in
the base band. However, these inﬂuences can be calculated and used to derive required
suppressions of an anti-aliasing ﬁlter (AAF) in the AFE. A higher sampling rate reduces not
only digitisation noise, but it also increases the band of frequencies that is not aliased into
the signal bandwidth, simplifying the ﬁlter construction. Since faster sampling is usually
accompanied by higher power consumption and other system design demands a trade-oﬀ
has to be made. The response of the PR has to be taken into account as well, which will
often already provide some level of suppression at higher frequencies.
C. ADC sampling jitter and pilot tone
During the digitisation the signal is sampled using the provided ADC clock. Any phase
change in the distribution or application of this clock to the sampling process causes an
eﬀective timing jitter and a corresponding phase change in the measured signals. The phase
error amplitude spectral density ˜ϕ˜τ ([ ˜ϕ˜τ] = rad/
√
Hz) scales with the input signal frequency
and the timing jitter spectral density ˜τ ([˜τ] = s/
√
Hz):
˜ϕ˜τ = 2πfs· ˜τ. (2)
7
Experiments in the last decade have revealed that all suitable ADCs have an inherent 1 /f
timing jitter noise that prevents phasemeters from directly achieving the desired performance
levels. This noise is inherent to the ADCs themselves, and is present even with a perfect
clock distribution.
However, the timing jitter can be accounted for by utilising a reference tone 3, also called
pilot tone, that is fed into all ADC channels. The phase deviations of this tone, whose
frequency fp is well known, can be converted into an eﬀective measurement of the timing
jitter. The corrected phase for each input channel ϕi,c is given by the combination of the
signal phase measurement ϕi,s and the individual pilot tone measurement ϕi,p:
ϕi,c =ϕi,s−ϕi,p
fi,s
fp
. (3)
To implement such a correction scheme the AFE needs to be able to distribute the pilot
tone, to add it to each individual signal and to deliver both signals after appropriate signal
conditioning to the ADC, without spoiling the phase noise performance of either tone. The
requirement for the pilot depends on the frequency ratio.
In a timing picture the pilot tone is the eﬀective, jitter free (reduced) reference clock.
D. ADC analogue parameters
So far we have focused on the sampling parameters of ADCs. However, the analogue
eﬀects described in the following sections III and IV are also relevant for the ADCs. We have
empirically tested candidate ADCs for compliance by directly performing pilot tone corrected
phase noise measurements in relevant thermal environments, as described in Section V.
III. ANALOGUE FRONT-END
The signal conditioning for digitisation is done in the AFE. In addition to the above
described functions the AFE also converts the single ended input signal into a diﬀeren-
tial signal with a desired gain and impedance to match the following ADC. The separate
functions required of the AFE are listed in the following:
• Buﬀer: Receive PR signal from coaxial cable.
• Ampliﬁer: Amplify signal with desired gain.
8
• Anti-aliasing ﬁlter: Reduce unwanted signal components above the Nyquist frequency.
• Pilot tone distribution: Deliver the pilot tone to individual AFEs without introducing
excess phase noise.
• Adder: Add the pilot tone to the PR signal before digitisation.
• Single-ended to diﬀerential converter: Prepare the signal for the ADC.
The critical eﬀects in the AFE that contribute to phase noise are summarised below.
A. Additive noise sources
Any component in the AFE can contribute additive electronic noise. The induced cor-
responding phase noise is simply given by the ratio of the noise and the root-mean-square
(RMS) signal amplitude at the given point in the measurement chain 4. Hence, the most
critical point for introducing noise is the one with the smallest signal. For LISA this is gen-
erally the ﬁrst ampliﬁcation in the trans-impedance ampliﬁer of the photo receiver14. Signals
sent to the phasemeter are assumed to be ampliﬁed to suﬃciently high levels, such that fun-
damental noise from passive components, like Johnson noise from resistors, is suﬃciently
small.
Operational ampliﬁers and other active components used in the AFE can also intro-
duce voltage noise in the MHz signal band. To achieve eﬀective phase noise levels below
6µrad/
√
Hz these contributions should be below 600 nV/
√
Hz for typical minimal signal
RMS amplitudes of 100 mV. Commercially available low-noise operational ampliﬁers achieve
noise levels on the order of a few nV/
√
Hz, which makes this contribution non-critical for
the circuits used in the AFE, like inverting-ampliﬁers with moderate levels of gain (the noise
coupling of operational ampliﬁers is gain dependent 16).
B. Phase noise
Changes of the signal phase in the AFE directly spoil the measurement performance.
Each component in the AFE can inﬂuence the phase of a transmitted signal and here we
shortly describe two types of phase noise coupling that are relevant and occurred during our
experiments.
9
1. Temperature coupling through ﬁnite phase response
Components in the AFE have non-ﬂat transfer functionsT (f). Any frequency dependent
phase response, as, for example, induced by a simple signal delay, inﬂuences the phase
propagation through the measurement chain. Constant, linear frequency dependent phase
response is not critical for LISA, because the signal frequency changes are happening at
frequencies below the measurements band ( < 1 mHz). If signiﬁcant frequency drifts occur
within the measurement band, like expected for GRACE Follow-On 2, the overall phase
response either has to be suﬃciently ﬂat, or a correction in post-processing could be applied.
Even for a constant input frequencyfs the phase response can cause signiﬁcant phase noise
if its value, arg (T (fs)), is inﬂuenced by in-band ﬂuctuations of temperature, for example
due to the change of a resistance or capacitance. Flat transfer functions are in general
less susceptible to these ﬂuctuations, as the susceptibility to thermal variations depends
on the absolute slope of the phase response. Accordingly, the phase of signals at higher
frequencies is more susceptible to thermal changes in bandwidth limited circuits. A reduction
of temperature ﬂuctuations is one way to mitigate the induced phase noise (as we present in
Section VI), but limitations in size, power consumption and cost of the apparatus limit this
approach. Performing detailed analysis of each components susceptibility to temperature
changes is required to reduce the coupling itself. Choice of more stable components and
thermal compensation are some of the methods that can be applied. A rule of thumb that
we applied during our investigations is to use components with as large a bandwidth as
possible. This approximates ﬂat transfer functions responses that minimise the coupling to
thermal eﬀects.
Due to this coupling the most critical component in the AFE is the anti-aliasing ﬁlter. It
requires a large suppression above the Nyquist frequency to ensure shot-noise limited perfor-
mance (see Section II), which strongly limits its bandwidth and phase response ﬂatness, and
it has to have suﬃciently low coupling of thermal noise into phase noise. Our investigations
presented here do not include a detailed analysis of, nor a design for, the AAF. Based on
our later presented results it is assumed, however, that integrating the AAF into the PRs
might be beneﬁcial, due to the better thermal stability.
10
2. Flicker phase noise
Another source of phase noise is ﬂicker noise, that is, for example, induced by a 1 /f
noise at DC in ampliﬁers that eﬀectively modulates the carrier phase 17. In our experiments
we have avoided using components that contribute any such excess noise, by performing
empirical tests. The investigation of such eﬀects is a separate topic that goes beyond the work
presented here and we found no essential components that are limited by them. Frequency
mixers are a prominent example of components limited by such noise and we have observed
it in earlier studies 4.
C. Pilot tone distribution
The use of a pilot tone requires it to be distributed to each analogue measurement channel.
This involves impedance matched signal splitting, signal routing, and, as discussed later in
Section IV, isolation between channels. The phase noise analysis done for the AFE also
has to be applied to the pilot tone distribution (PTD), being, however, slightly simpliﬁed
because the pilot has a single, ﬁxed frequency.
IV. NON-LINEAR EFFECTS
The phase measurement eﬀects described above are critical for understanding and de-
signing phasemeter systems. So far we have described the inﬂuence of processes that either
cause an additive noise or a phase noise of the coherent signal. Both of these noise types
cause an eﬀective phase noise (additive noise is converted into phase noise in the mixer in the
ADPLL), whose underlying processes are linear with respect to the noise amplitude within
the bandwidth of the ADPLL. But, other types of interactions can also limit the achievable
performance. The one we consider here is the presence of additional, parasitic tones at the
signal frequency or close by. The ADPLL does not distinguish between the actual signal
tone and the parasitic one and will act as if a single disturbed tone is present (parasitic
tones outside the ADPLL bandwidth are rejected).
A simple way to determine the combined, disturbed tone is to describe both tones as
phasors in the complex plane at the readout frequency. The two phasors, or 2-dimensional
vectors, each deﬁned by an amplitude and a phase, are added, resulting in the eﬀective
11
0ϕ [rad]
π
π−ße
Im
s
v
vs
vsϕ
sϕvϕ
errϕ
∆ϕ
errϕ
FIG. 3. Illustration of small vector noise coupling. The left side shows a sketch of the vector
addition responsible for the non-linear noise coupling in case of small vector noise. The right side
shows a simulated time series of a small vector phase modulation for coherent modulations with
diﬀerent DC oﬀsets and amplitudes and for white noise and 1 /f noise.
phasor, with a corresponding phase and amplitude. The diﬀerence between the eﬀective
phase and the phase of the signal tone is the phase error. The vector addition causes the
coupling into the measurement of phase or amplitude changes of the parasitic tone relative
to the signal tone to be highly non-linear. A parasitic tone that has a constant phase and
amplitude ratio relative to the signal, will only result in a DC phase error, which is anyhow
neglected for longitudinal displacement measurements (not for DWS though).
The parasitic signals become more relevant when they have non-negligible dynamics rel-
ative to the signal tone. Such unwanted, parasitic tones are made as small as possible in
comparison to the signal in the system design. Their eﬀect is illustrated in Figure 3. In
this case, a small phasor, or vector, ⃗ vv is added to the larger, dominating signal tone ⃗ vs.
The phase noise caused in such a situation is often referred to as small-vector noise. The
complex coupling of relative phase ﬂuctuations (ϕ∆ =ϕs−ϕv) into phase error ϕerr can be
approximated for the small parasitic vector to
ϕerr = vv
vs
sin (ϕs−ϕv). (4)
Such non-linear noise couplings are well known in the gravitational wave community. A
small vector noise has been observed and suppressed in LISA Pathﬁnder 18, and stray light
and ghost beams, which are present in many laser interferometers, cause a very similar eﬀect
12
as well.
In case of small relative phase dynamics ϕ∆, and DC phases close to the linear regimes
of Equation 4, the induced phase noise is linear to the dynamics, and its amplitude is
attenuated by the ratio vv
vs
. In the more general case of large dynamics and arbitrary phase
relations, no simple method exists to predict the phase error from the relative dynamics.
Some examples for this coupling are shown in simulated time series on the right of Figure
3. Large low frequency changes can be unconverted to higher frequency errors, due to
the non-linear coupling. An important feature of this noise coupling is, that the induced
phase error has a maximum amplitude, which is also deﬁned by the ratio vv
vs
. This leads to
a characteristic and often diagnostically useful time-domain signature of a constant width
envelope. Small vector noise driven by low-frequency random processes with a 1/f spectrum,
like, for example, temperature ﬂuctuations, often show a characteristic phase noise spectrum.
Such a spectrum ﬂattens out to lower frequencies (due to the maximum error amplitude)
and a characteristic noise shoulder is observed at the high frequency end of the generated
noise bandwidth. If the readout bandwidth of the phasemeter is low in comparison to the
generated noise, the drop-oﬀ to higher frequencies might not be observed. In this case a
small vector noise can be misinterpreted as white readout noise and the underlying non-linear
coupling makes eventual noise hunting more complex.
A. Cross talk
The most relevant parasitic tones in a multi channel phasemeter are cross talk components
from other channels operating at the same, or nearby frequencies. The phase of these tones
can be totally unrelated, potentially causing a very dynamic behaviour of ϕ∆. This is, for
example, the case for the two test mass and reference interferometers on the two optical
benches in a LISA satellite19. The parasitic voltage in the case of cross talk can be modelled
by the product of the amplitude of the unrelated signal vu with a cross talk coupling factor
C. Assuming a coupling as described in Equation 4, equal amplitudes for all input signals
(vu =vs), and a performance requirement of better than 2πµ rad, a crosstalk suppression in
the order of C =−105 dB is necessary. This level is determined from a simple maximum
error calculation. Better estimates can be made by applying full models of the expected
phase dynamics and using them to make a prediction of the behaviour of ϕ∆.
13
Cross talk can occur at every stage of the analogue signal processing, including, promi-
nently, the PR20. Eﬀects like electro-magnetic interference, power supply or ground stability
can limit the achievable cross talk suppression between individual channels. Mitigating these
eﬀects requires detailed analysis and design of circuits, layouts, PCB stacks, component
placements, electro-magnetic shielding and more. These investigations exceed the scope of
this article. However, we will brieﬂy discuss the two most critical points in the AFE of our
phasemeter systems where the achievable limit of cross talk suppression is determined by
component choice and simple, schematic level circuit design.
Multi channel ADCs have inherent cross talk, often with a coupling of about -90 dB,
which is documented in their data sheets. Hence, using multi-channel ADCs for the readout
of independent IFOs should be avoided to mitigate this problem. On the other hand, using
them to read out the four signals of a quadrant photo diode is suitable, because these
signals are already mixed due to the cross talk in the PR, and they are very similar. They
are dominated by the DWS signal, keeping the value of ϕ∆ small and even well measured.
The pilot tone distribution is a direct link that connects all input channels. Suﬃcient
care has to be applied to ensure that no signiﬁcant portion of the signals is transmitted
back through the PTD to other signals. The adder components in the AFE are critical,
they should provide suﬃcient initial suppression of backwards reﬂected signals. Additional
isolating components (buﬀers, ﬁlters, isolators) can also be introduced into the PTD, as long
as they don’t contribute excess phase noise.
B. Analogue reﬂections
Small vector noise can also be caused by a tone that is contaminated with a small delayed
version of itself. This can occur if signal reﬂections are present, for example due to impedance
mismatches. Figure 4 shows a simple model of such an eﬀect. A signal is fed from the photo
diode (the source with impedance Zs) through a cable (impedance Zc and length lc) to
the phasemeter (the load with impedance Zl). The impedance mismatches give rise to two
reﬂection coeﬃcients, here denoted as rin and rout. For small reﬂectivities the amplitude of
the ﬁrst delayed signalv′
s reaching the load (we discard multiple reﬂections) is attenuated by
rin·rout. The amplitude of the actual signal vs is, however, almost undisturbed. The phase
of v′
s relative to vs is determined by its dynamics and by twice the delay τc, which is given
14
by the cable length and the eﬀective signal speed, in typical coaxial cables τc≈ lc/(2/3c).
Using these relations and Equation 4 we can estimate the induced phase noise by such an
analogue reﬂection:
ϕerr≈rinrout sin (2dϕs
dt τ)≈rinrout sin (3dϕs
dt
lc
c ). (5)
The expected signal dynamics for inter-satellite laser interferometry are quite large (they are
dominated by laser frequency noise the level of which depends on the applied stabilisation
scheme). Assuming the laser frequency noise ˜f is still small in comparison to the delay we
can simplify the coupling,
˜ϕerr(f)≈ 3rinrout ˜f(f)lc
c . (6)
Even for large levels of in-band laser frequency noise (3000 Hz/
√
Hz) and cable lengths on the
order of 2 m this coupling only becomes relevant for large reﬂection coeﬃcients of more than
10%. However, if laser frequency noise levels exceed the linear range, even at much lower
frequencies, eﬀective noise levels can be upconverted to in-band Fourier frequencies, due to
the non-linear coupling. Our presented model is largely simpliﬁed and aims to give insight
into a possible explanation for an unexpected noise ﬂoor that we have observed in the later
described measurements, which was found to be somewhat inﬂuenced by signal dynamics,
cable lengths and impedance matching. Inﬂuences of our more complex signal networks,
including the pilot tone distribution, and of frequency dependent impedance values have not
yet been accounted for and might need to be analysed in future studies.
V. PERFORMANCE INVESTIGATIONS USING PHASEMETER
PROTOTYPES
A standard technique for investigating the noise of phase readout systems is the so-called
null or zero measurement. A single signal is split into two or more readout channels and the
diﬀerences in the measurement phases are used to investigate the noise ﬂoor. Figure 5 shows
this principle for a two channel measurement. Throughout our investigation we performed
multi-channel measurements and we plot the noise for each channel ˜ϕi by computing the
diﬀerence between its phase and the measured phase average:
˜ϕi =ϕi,s− 1
N
N∑
k=1
ϕk,s. (7)
15
sZ
cZ lZ
inr outr sv
s
′v
cl
FIG. 4. Sketch for signal reﬂections occurring in the signal distribution from, for example, the
photo diode to the analogue-front end. For small reﬂection coeﬃcients rx a dominating parasitic
signal v′
s is delayed by twice the cable length lc and contaminates the actual signal vs.
Phasemeter
ADCAFE
ADCAFE
sv
pv
,s1ϕ
,s2ϕ
,p2ϕ
,p1ϕ
FIG. 5. Sketch of a null or zero measurement with two channels. The signal is split in a signal
splitter (marked in orange) and fed into two readout channels. A pilot tone is also fed to the
phasemeter, split and distributed via the PTD (marked blue) and added. Two all-digital phase-
locked loops are used to read out the phase of the signal and the pilot tone for each channel.
This type of measurement is easily implemented and well suited to hunt critical noise sources.
But, the subtraction of almost equal signals makes this scheme insensitive to common non-
linear eﬀects4. Cross talk inﬂuence, for example, can not be measured well, since all channels
already measure the exact same signal. Noise due to thermal ﬂuctuations is, if it is common
16
between all channels, also not detectable by such measurements. Common additive noise
can, in the linear operating range of the ADPLL, not be detected either. The noise ﬂoor
due to uncorrelated additive noise depends on the number of compared channels, as evident
from Equation 7.
An important ﬁrst result of our investigations is that some commercially available ADC
circuits, using ampliﬁers for ADC signal conditioning, are capable of achieving the desired
phase noise performance levels even in rather uncontrolled thermal environments. These
systems only require the addition of a pilot tone to the input signals to enable the necessary
timing jitter correction. We used this fact and combined an FPGA with a suitable ADC
card (FMC107 from 4DSP 21) to evaluate the feasibility and performance of diﬀerent pilot
tone distribution and adding schemes. For these measurement we used a rather stable
input signal, produced by a commercial signal generator, and split and distributed it via a
thermally isolated, resistive power splitter (also referred to as resistive tee). Thereby, we
ensured that no signiﬁcant phase noise was introduced by the signal distribution.
A. Active front-end
We tested two schemes using an active pilot tone adder. High-bandwidth operation am-
pliﬁers were used in simple inverting adder circuits (also referred to as summing ampliﬁers)
to combine the signals and the pilot tone. The PTD was implemented in two ways, once
using a resistive 50 Ω matched splitter, and once using commercial, transformer based power
splitter (also referred to as hybrid coupler) with a ﬂat amplitude response in the signal
bandwidth. Both options were integrated, together with the adders, on a separate circuit
board, which was connected to the signal source and to the ADC card using coaxial cables.
Sketches of the implemented schematics are shown in Figure 6, a) and b). A passive thermal
isolation of the components was added by wrapping them in bubble wrap foil.
The achieved phase noise performance levels are shown in Figure 7 for the resistive power
splitter set-up, the levels are also representative for the once achieved with the set-up using
transformer based power splitters. The dashed lines represent the spectral density of the
diﬀerences of the phase errors for the uncorrected signals. The straight lines show the
same signals corrected for pilot tone jitter. Interestingly, one of the channels (C) shows an
increased phase noise before correction. This is, however, suﬃciently suppressed afterwards.
17
+
-
TR
TR
TR
+
-
TR
TR
TR
1s,v
2s,v
pv
+
-
TR
TR
TR
+
-
TR
TR
TR
1s,v
2s,v
pv
 pv
1s,v
2s,v
PTDPTD PTD
AFE
AFE
AFE
ß) b) c)
FIG. 6. Sketch of the schematics for the tested pilot tone addition schemes, each one is shown for
two channels. a) Active pilot addition and distribution via resistive power splitter. b) Active pilot
addition and distribution via transformer based power splitter and addition via inverting adder
circuits. c) Passive pilot addition and distribution via transformer based power splitters. The
orange arrows indicate signal leakage into the PTD that leads to cross talk.
Both schemes were able to achieve the desired performance levels. This demonstrates that
the operational ampliﬁer based adding circuits, as well as the pilot tone distribution via
resistive network or commercial power splitters are suitable to perform at the desired noise
levels for the speciﬁc set of frequencies used in each measurement.
In terms of suppression of crosstalk via the PTD the power splitter implementation is
considered favourable. A cross talk signal introduced into the PT chain in one of the adders
is attenuated by the isolation of the power splitters (typically 30 dB) before it can reach
another signal channel. A summing ampliﬁer circuit provides a strong isolation between
inputs, due to the virtual ground at the inverting input, which gives a strong initial cross
talk suppression. However, a reduction of the nominal cross talk coupling via the PT
distribution to less than 105 dB requires additional components.
B. Passive front-end
Based on the positive results with the passive pilot tone distribution an eﬀort was started
to test a fully passive PTD and adder that uses two types of commercial, transformer based
18
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
010
-7
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
ϕ [rad/
√
Hz]
 
 
f [Hz]
Ch A
Ch B
Ch C
Ch D
NSF·radµ5.8
FIG. 7. Performance of active pilot tone adder and resistive distribution. The signal frequency
was at 11 MHz, the pilot tone at 33 MHz. Excess noise in C is not understood. The dashed lines
show the performance without jitter correction.
power splitters. The beneﬁt of such an implementation is that it consumes no power and
thus generates very little heat, which simpliﬁes any thermal isolation schemes.
We have constructed AFEs with two diﬀerent power splitters, one with a plastic housing
(ADP-2-1, Mini-Circuits) and one in a metal housing (PSC-2-1, Mini-Circuits). Separate
circuit boards containing the PT adder were, again, placed in passive thermal isolation
and connected to the ADC card using impedance matched coaxial cables. A sketch of the
schematics is shown in c) in Figure 6. We investigated the phase noise performance and
found that both implementations were also able to achieve the desired levels for some speciﬁc
set of signal frequencies. Figure 8 shows the performance for the set-up using the PSC-2-1,
which is also representative for the performance achieved with the ADP-2-1.
We investigated the described schemes only with the given temperature stability and for
a small set of frequencies, because the prototypes were aimed at single frequency opera-
tion. Choosing smaller (below ≈10 MHz) or higher (above≈20 MHz) input frequencies did,
19
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
010
-7
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
ϕ [rad/
√
Hz]
 
 
f [Hz]
Ch A
Ch B
Ch C
Ch D
NSF·radµ5.8
FIG. 8. Performance of passive pilot tone adder and distribution with PSC-2-1. The signal fre-
quency was at 15 MHz, the pilot tone at 35 MHz. The dashed lines show the performance without
jitter correction.
however, indicate the presence of excess noise. This was expected due to the bandpass char-
acteristic of the transformer based power splitter. Their non-ﬂat transfer function at lower
and higher frequencies increases the coupling of temperature ﬂuctuations into phase. It is
currently not known, if this could have been reduced by further improved thermal stability
to acceptable levels.
C. 16 channel prototype
Based on the availability of a suitable PT adder scheme we designed an integrated
phasemeter prototype that was aimed at achieving LISA performance levels at a single
frequency with 16 channels. In terms of cross talk we decided to only aim for a suppression
level of 60 dB. This was limited by the cross talk induced on the utilised commercial ADC
card (FMC116 from 4DSP 22).
20
FIG. 9. Photographs of the 16 channel phasemeter built using commercially available components
in combination with a passive pilot tone distribution and adder circuit.
We chose the implementation relying only on the transformer based power splitter PSC-
2-1. Two circuit boards with splitter networks were manufactured and mounted into a
common housing with the FPGA board and ADC card, as shown in Figure 9.
Using a signal distribution with one two-way resistive splitter, and two eight-way resistive
splitters we fed the same input signal into all 16 channels. Again, we were able to achieve
µrad performance with suﬃcient thermal isolation of the splitters and cables. However, the
white noise levels in each channel showed varying levels, as shown in Figure 10, which were
found to correspond to the cable length used for distributing the signals from the splitters
to the phasemeter. Using cables with matched lengths allowed us to reduce this noise ﬂoor.
At this point we were not able to fully identify this noise coupling. One speculation is
that the white noise is actually caused by a small vector noise present in all channels, which
21
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
010
-ß
10
-5
10
-4
ϕ [rad/
√
Hz]
 
 
f [Hz]
NSﬃ·radµ5.ﬂ
2ﬁ0ﬀ
0ﬁ7ﬀ
1ﬁ0ﬀ
0ﬁ5ﬀ
FIG. 10. Performance measurement using the 16 channel phasemeter. The signal frequency was
at 13 MHz, the pilot tone at 35.3 MHz. The inﬂuence of the diﬀerent cable lengths (colour coded)
on the achieved noise ﬂoor is clearly visible.
might be caused by impedance mismatches in the signal or PT distribution, by the cross talk
between the channels, or a combination of these eﬀects, with the phase of the parasitic tone
relative to the actual signal driven by the dynamics of the signal itself. The diﬀerent cable
lengths change the eﬀective coupling in each channel, ultimately leading to the observed
white noise ﬂoor given by the maximum amplitudes of the small vector noise. A similar
eﬀect is observed in the experiment presented in the next section.
VI. LISA PHASEMETER ELEGANT BREADBOARD
In the scope of the LISA metrology system technology development project we built and
tested a full breadboard of the LISA phasemeter 9,10 (see Figure 1). For this system we
implemented an active AFE using operation ampliﬁers and a PTD using transformer based
power splitters on the clock module and impedance matched distribution on the ADC cards.
22
FIG. 11. Shown are thermal and corresponding optical pictures of the elegant breadboard model,
taken about 20 minutes after start-up in air. The left image shows a close-up of the AFE, showing
the heat dissipated by the ADC, which causes a thermal gradient through the AFE. The middle
image shows the bridge FPGA and the FFT FPGA 9, both with passive coolers attached to them,
and one of the systems power supplies in the upper right corner. The FFT FPGA has about twice
the amount of logic gates and, therefore, a higher power consumption. The right image shows the
overall systems with three ADC modules and one DAC module. The DAC card generates signiﬁ-
cantly more heat. The FPGA temperature also varies strongly on the ADC modules, depending
on whether they have a passive cooler mounted or not.
To determine the performance of our system we conducted a comprehensive measurement
campaign using LISA like analogue input signals, which were generated by a dedicated signal
simulator. These signals included a signal tone that had the dynamics of the expected laser
frequency noise (the same conservative spectrum was used in our DSP study4) and a constant
frequency drift. The synthesised signal also included two smaller side bands at ±1 MHz23, a
weak 1.25 MHz modulation of pseudo-random noise24,25, and a white noise level with variable
signal-to-noise ratio. We performed measurements at various signal frequencies, covering the
range from 7 MHz up to 25 MHz. The input signal in each case was split using an 8-way
resistive splitter and short cables of equal lengths. These were connected to two ADC
cards, allowing us to investigate the noise between channels on a single card, and between
23
PeltierFan
AFE
FIG. 12. Sketch of the active temperature stabilisation scheme. The temperature of the air ﬂowing
over the AFE is kept constant by actuating on the Peltier element current. Two large fans ensure
the coupling of the inner and out volume to the Peltier and additional fans are monted on each
ADC module to optimise the coupling of the airﬂow to the AFE. Passive heat exchangers are glued
onto all ADCs and FPGAs.
independent cards.
The dense placement of the various components on the breadboard caused not only
a strong heat dissipation, but also strong temperature ﬂuctuations. An overview of the
heat sources is given in Figure 11. To achieve the desired performance levels we therefore
implemented an active thermal stabilisation of the whole system. To this end, we designed
a double-walled housing and integrated a Peltier element into the top, which was coupled to
both heat baths via additional fans. A diagram of the stabilisation is shown in Figure 12.
Using a temperature sensor placed close to the AFE, we implemented an active temperature
stabilisation which actuated on the current through the Peltier element. Figure 13 shows
the thermal spectra, measured with temperature sensors positioned close to the AFE, on
each ADC card with the system open in air and with active stabilisation. We were able to
suppress the temperature ﬂuctuations at the AFE to a level below 200 mK/
√
Hz at 1 mHz.
24
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
T ßK/
√
Hz]
f ßHz]
 
 
ADC3-U4
ADC3-U5
ADC4-U4
ADC4-U5
FIG. 13. Temperature spectral density measured with the sensors placed next to the AFE of the
two ADC cards used during the measurement campaign. Shown are the values while operating the
system in air (dashed lines), and while using the active temperature stabilisation in a dedicated
housing (solid lines).
Using that thermal stabilisation we were able to achieve full performance for all frequen-
cies with input white noise corresponding to a SNR of 75 dBHz and 95 dBHz; as expected in
intersatellite interferometers with long arms and low received optical power. Figure 14 shows
the results of two measurements from our campaign. The ﬁrst measurement (dashed lines)
was done using a standard signal generator, locked to the phasemeter clock, to generate a
clean input signal while operating the system in air. The performance is limited in all chan-
nels by some 1/f noise (due to thermal noise) and no excess white noise is present in any of
the channels. The second measurement (solid lines) was done with the full LISA-like input
signal at 75 dBHz SNR and with the active temperature stabilisation. For most channels we
achieved the desired performance and all other measurements using higher SNR and lower
signal frequencies showed even better performance. Similar to our earlier investigations with
25
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
010
-ß
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
ϕ [rad/
√
Hz]
f [Hz]
 
 
8.5 µrad
3ﬃ
3ﬂ
3ﬁ
3ﬀ
4ﬃ
4ﬂ
4ﬁ
4ﬀ
FIG. 14. Phase spectral densities for two measurements at 25 MHz signal frequency, one with
temperature stabilisation (solid lines) and one without (dashed lines).
the 16 channel prototype we ﬁnd, again, a channel dependent white noise ﬂoor. From the
diﬀerence to the ﬁrst measurement we can directly conclude that this eﬀect is driven by the
signal dynamics, which were minimal in the ﬁrst measurement, leading to no excess white
noise. We investigated the cause for observing this coupling without diﬀerent cable lengths
only shortly. We found a dependency of this coupling on the resistor value matching in our
resistive power splitter used to distribute the signal. Hence, we speculate that this noise
is another example for a small vector noise that is related to the signal dynamics, which is
either caused by impedance mismatches, cross talk, or a combination of these eﬀects.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this article we have presented a conceptual and experimental analysis of eﬀects in the
analogue measurement chain that can spoil the performance of phase readout systems at low
frequencies. We have performed various experimental investigations with prototype readout
26
systems and found a wide variety of set-ups that are suitable to achieve performance for
certain frequencies. We were able to implement these prototypes with a mixture of com-
mercially available hardware and additionally constructed analogue circuits for distributing
and adding a pilot tone.
The design of a full LISA phasemeter prototype, able to operate over the whole desired
frequency range, was found to be more demanding, requiring, amongst other things, an active
temperature stabilisation of the analogue front-end. With the LISA phasemeter prototype
we have demonstrated full phase readout performance of better than
√
2· 2πµ rad/
√
Hz for
a single channel with LISA like input signals in null-measurement schemes.
Some of our measurements indicate the presence of non-linear noise couplings due to
small vector signals. We have discussed the need to take such couplings into account and we
described its inﬂuence in some detail. Due to the lack of sensitivity to many of these eﬀects,
we argue that other types of performance tests have to be implemented in the future, that
take such inﬂuences into account. Three signal tests involving the whole measurement chain
are, in our perspective, the preferred method to do that.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge funding by the European Space Agency (ESA) within the technology de-
velopment project “LISA Metrology System” and “Optical Bench Development for LISA”.
The authors also gratefully acknowledge support by the International Max-Planck Research
School for Gravitational Wave Astronomy (IMPRS-GW), by the Centre for Quantum En-
gineering and Space-Time Research (QUEST) and by Deutsches Zentrum f¨ ur Luft- und
Raumfahrt (DLR) with funding from the Bundesministerium f¨ ur Wirtschaft und Technolo-
gie (project reference 50 OQ 0601).
REFERENCES
1K. Danzmann et al., “The Gravitational Universe: Whitepaper for the ESA L2/L3 selec-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1305.5720 (2013).
2B. S. Sheard, G. Heinzel, K. Danzmann, D. A. Shaddock, W. M. Klipstein, and W. M.
Folkner, Journal of Geodesy 86, 1083 (2012).
27
3D. Shaddock, B. Ware, P. Halverson, R. E. Spero, and B. Klipstein, AIP Conf. Proc. 873,
689 (2006).
4O. Gerberding, B. Sheard, I. Bykov, J. Kullmann, J. J. E. Delgado, K. Danzmann, and
G. Heinzel, Classical and Quantum Gravity 30, 235029 (2013).
5S. P. Francis, T. T.-Y. Lam, K. McKenzie, A. J. Sutton, R. L. Ward, D. E. McClelland,
and D. A. Shaddock, Opt. Lett. 39, 5251 (2014).
6Y. Yu, S. Mitryk, and G. Mueller, Phys. Rev. D 90, 062005 (2014).
7H.-S. Liu, Y.-H. Dong, Y.-Q. Li, Z.-R. Luo, and G. Jin, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments
85, 024503 (2014).
8Y.-R. Liang, H.-Z. Duan, X.-L. Xiao, B.-B. Wei, and H.-C. Yeh, Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments 86, 016106 (2015).
9O. Gerberding, S. Barke, I. Bykov, K. Danzmann, A. Enddaard, J. J. Esteban, A. Gianolio,
T. V. Hansen, G. Heinzel, A. Hornstrup, O. Jennrich, J. Kullmann, S. M. Pedersen,
T. Rasmussen, Z. Sodnik, and M. Suess, in ASP Conference Series; 9th LISA Symposium,
ASP Conference Series, Vol. 467, edited by G. Auger, P. Binetruy, and E. Plagnol (2012)
pp. 271 – 275.
10S. Barke, N. Brause, I. Bykov, J. J. Esteban Delgado, A. Enggaard, O. Gerberding,
G. Heinzel, J. Kullmann, S. M. Pedersen, and T. Rasmussen, “LISA metrology system-
ﬁnal report,” online: http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-001M-0000-0023-E266-6 (2014).
11M. Tr¨ obs, L. dArcio, S. Barke, J. Bogenstahl, I. Bykov, M. Dehne, C. Diekmann, E. Fitzsi-
mons, R. Fleddermann, O. Gerberding, et al., in Proceedings of the 9th International Con-
ference on Space Optics, Ajaccio (2012).
12R. Spero, B. Bachman, G. de Vine, J. Dickson, W. M. Klipstein, T. Ozawa, K. McKenzie,
D. A. Shaddock, D. Robison, A. Sutton, and B. Ware, Class. Quantum Grav. 28, 094007
(2011).
13D. Sch¨ utze, G. Stede, V. M¨ uller, O. Gerberding, T. Bandikova, B. S. Sheard, G. Heinzel,
and K. Danzmann, Opt. Express 22, 24117 (2014).
14F. G. Cervantes, J. Livas, R. Silverberg, E. Buchanan, and R. Stebbins, Classical and
Quantum Gravity 28, 094010 (2011).
15R. A. Wannamaker, The theory of dithered quantization. (University of Waterloo, 2003).
16B. Carter, Op Amps for everyone (Elsevier, 2003).
17R. Boudot and E. Rubiola, Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, IEEE Trans-
28
actions on 59, 2613 (2012).
18G. Hechenblaikner, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 30, 941 (2013).
19M. Tr¨ obs, L. d’Arcio, S. Barke, J. Bogenstahl, C. Diekmann, E. Fitzsimons, O. Gerberding,
J. Hennig, F. Hey, H. Hogenhuis, et al., in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference
Series, Vol. 467 (2013) p. 233.
20A. Joshi, S. Datta, J. Rue, J. Livas, R. Silverberg, and F. Guzman Cervantes, in SPIE
Astronomical Telescopes+ Instrumentation, Vol. 8453 (2012) pp. 84532G–84532G–10.
214DSP, “FMC10x user manual,” http://www.4dsp.com/FMC107.php (2011).
224DSP, “FMC116/FMC112 user manual,” http://www.4dsp.com/FMC116.php (2011).
23G. Heinzel, J. J. Esteban, S. Barke, M. Otto, Y. Wang, A. F. Garcia Marin, and K. Danz-
mann, Classical and Quantum Gravity 28, 094008 (2011).
24J. J. E. Delgado, Laser ranging and data communication for the laser interferometer space
antenna, Ph.D. thesis, Leibniz Universit¨ at Hannover (2012).
25A. J. Sutton, K. McKenzie, B. Ware, G. de Vine, R. E. Spero, W. Klipstein, and D. A.
Shaddock, Class. Quantum Grav. 30, 075008 (2013).
29