Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712
© 2023 Author(s).
SLAC microresonator RF (SMuRF)
electronics: A tone-tracking readout system
for superconducting microwave resonator
arrays
Cite as: Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0125084
Submitted: 09 September 2022 • Accepted: 03 January 2023 • Published Online: 27 January 2023
 Cyndia Yu, 
  Zeeshan Ahmed, Josef C. Frisch, et al.
ARTICLES YOU MAY BE INTERESTED IN
Position linearity analysis of circular arc terminated resistive anode using finite element
method for photon-counting imaging detectors
Review of Scientific Instruments 94, 013703 (2023); https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0118899
Design and experimental research of a compact directional coupler for X-band relativistic
triaxial klystron amplifier
Review of Scientific Instruments 94, 014713 (2023); https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0130103
Asynchronous x-ray multiprobe data acquisition for x-ray transient absorption
spectroscopy
Review of Scientific Instruments 94, 014714 (2023); https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0100596
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
SLAC microresonator RF (SMuRF)
electronics: A tone-tracking readout system
for superconducting microwave resonator arrays
Cite as: Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084
Submitted: 9 September 2022 • Accepted: 3 January 2023 •
Published Online: 27 January 2023
Cyndia Yu,1,2,a)
 Zeeshan Ahmed,2,3
 Josef C. Frisch,3 Shawn W. Henderson,2,3 Max Silva-Feaver,4
Kam Arnold,4
 David Brown,3 Jake Connors,5
 Ari J. Cukierman,1,2 J. Mitch D’Ewart,3
Bradley J. Dober,5
 John E. Dusatko,3 Gunther Haller,3
 Ryan Herbst,3
 Gene C. Hilton,5
Johannes Hubmayr,5 Kent D. Irwin,1,2,3
 Chao-Lin Kuo,1,2,3 John A. B. Mates,5
 Larry Ruckman,3
Joel Ullom,5
 Leila Vale,5
 Daniel D. Van Winkle,3
 Jesus Vasquez,3 and Edward Young1,2
AFFILIATIONS
1 Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA
2 Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Stanford, California 94305, USA
3 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA
4Department of Physics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA
5 National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, Colorado 80305, USA
a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: cyndiayu@stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
We describe the newest generation of the SLAC Microresonator RF (SMuRF) electronics, a warm digital control and readout system for
microwave-frequency resonator-based cryogenic detector and multiplexer systems, such as microwave superconducting quantum interfer-
ence device multiplexers (μmux) or microwave kinetic inductance detectors. Ultra-sensitive measurements in particle physics and astronomy
increasingly rely on large arrays of cryogenic sensors, which in turn necessitate highly multiplexed readout and accompanying room-
temperature electronics. Microwave-frequency resonators are a popular tool for cryogenic multiplexing, with the potential to multiplex
thousands of detector channels on one readout line. The SMuRF system provides the capability for reading out up to 3328 channels across
a 4–8 GHz bandwidth. Notably, the SMuRF system is unique in its implementation of a closed-loop tone-tracking algorithm that minimizes
RF power transmitted to the cold amplifier, substantially relaxing system linearity requirements and effective noise from intermodulation
products. Here, we present a description of the hardware, firmware, and software systems of the SMuRF electronics, comparing achieved per-
formance with science-driven design requirements. In particular, we focus on the case of large-channel-count, low-bandwidth applications,
but the system has been easily reconfigured for high-bandwidth applications. The system described here has been successfully deployed in lab
settings and field sites around the world and is baselined for use on upcoming large-scale observatories.
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0125084
I. INTRODUCTION
Superconducting detector technologies have enabled highly
sensitive measurements across a wide array of scientific applications,
including particle physics, astronomy, cosmology, materials science,
chemistry, biophysics, and quantum information science. 1–7 As
the instruments making these measurements move to ever-denser
detector arrays to increase their sensitivity or throughput, there is
a growing need for advancements in cryogenic multiplexing tech-
niques to reduce thermal loading at sub-Kelvin stages, cost, and inte-
gration complexity. As an example, transition edge sensors (TESs)
are a widely used superconducting detector technology that have
been fielded in arrays with over 10 000 detector channels. 8 Cryo-
genic multiplexing of TESs on fielded experiments has been achieved
with time-division multiplexing (TDM), 9 frequency-division mul-
tiplexing (FDM), 10 and Walsh code-division multiplexing (CDM)
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-1
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
techniques.11,12 These technologies operate at ∼MHz frequencies
and achieve multiplexing factors of O(100) sensors read out per wire,
but are limited by high cost, complexity, and/or noise penalties as
they move toward higher multiplexing factors. To achieve future
science goals that benefit from larger and/or more tightly packed
detector arrays, new strategies are being devised to push toward the
much larger sensor counts required.
Microwave frequency-division multiplexing techniques offer
one strategy for addressing these challenges by coupling signals to
superconducting microresonators on a single RF feedline. 13 The
high quality factors achieved by standard superconducting nanofab-
rication techniques along with the large readout bandwidth on
the microwave feedline in the 0.1–10 GHz frequency range enable
O(1000) multiplexing factors on a single coaxial line. In microwave
SQUID multiplexing ( μmux), each detector is inductively cou-
pled via an RF SQUID to a unique GHz-frequency resonator
such that detector signals correspond to shifts in the resonator’s
frequency.14,15 The resonator may also serve as both the read-
out and the detector simultaneously, as is the case for microwave
kinetic inductance detectors (MKIDs), where incoming photons
break Cooper pairs and induce a modulation of the resonance trans-
mission.3 In either scheme, many resonators with unique resonance
frequencies can be fit in the available readout bandwidth, allow-
ing large numbers of detectors to be read out on a single coaxial
input/output pair.
Despite the promise of these microwave resonator based sys-
tems, challenges in both cold and warm components had until
recently limited these systems from achieving their full multiplex-
ing potential. Previous implementations of μmux have traditionally
been limited by resonator spacing and bandwidth achieved in fab-
rication. These challenges have since been largely resolved, and
resonators with high quality factors, reproducible frequency spac-
ing, and bandwidths suitable for O(2000) multiplexing factors are
now being consistently produced. 16 KID devices have similarly
achieved sufficiently uniform fabrication and post-fabrication fre-
quency adjustments to realize O(1000) channel multiplexing factor
arrays.17,18 For several microwave resonator-based readout systems,
such as bolometric applications of μmux, which operate at higher
resonator drive powers, linearity of the cold amplifier and subse-
quent warm electronics have become important constraints in the
achievable multiplexing factor.
The SLAC Microresonator RF (SMuRF) warm electronics sys-
tem has been designed to meet these linearity challenges and read
out up to 3328 channels in a 4 GHz band. The SMuRF provides both
the RF and low-frequency signals required to enable full operation
of a microresonator-based readout system. Here and throughout
the text, we refer to RF as the frequency regime spanning about
1–10 GHz, while DC refers to both DC and low-frequency (up to
about 1 MHz) signals. The SMuRF system is unique in its imple-
mentation of fast tone tracking via a closed-loop adaptive filter,
which thereby reduces power on the cryogenic amplifiers and RF
mixers. This in turn increases the RF dynamic range of the electron-
ics, allowing for improved RF linearity and increasing the achievable
multiplexing factor. A prototype of SMuRF was described demon-
strating multiplexed readout of nearly 500 μmux channels. 19 Since
then, SMuRF has undergone several upgrades and has already been
used to read out TES-coupled arrays in laboratory and field observ-
ing settings, achieving multiplexing factors of over 900 channels on
a single coaxial pair. 20,21 This system is further being used for sev-
eral upcoming Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) experiments,
including Simons Observatory22 and BICEP Array.23
While SMuRF was designed and optimized for the read out of
TES-coupled μmux resonators, it is flexibly reconfigurable for appli-
cation to many other sensor and microwave readout technologies,
including KIDs, magnetic microcalorimeters (MMCs), and even
potentially superconducting qubits.3,24,25 Many other warm RF sys-
tems have been developed for GHz resonator read out, particularly
targeting the μmux and MKID applications.26–33 Compared to those
systems, SMuRF offers significant advantages, including linear RF
performance for high channel density over a 4 GHz bandwidth,
integrated high-performance low-frequency signal generation, tim-
ing and data streaming integration with large-scale experiment
infrastructures, and a unique tone-tracking capability.
In this paper, we present the design and performance of the
SMuRF electronics as developed for reading out the microwave
SQUID multiplexer and optimized for CMB experiments. We begin
with a brief introduction to the superconducting resonator systems
that SMuRF has been designed to read out in Sec. II. We pay spe-
cial attention to μmux for large-format arrays to motivate the design
needs of the readout electronics. In Sec. III, we outline the system
requirements driven by the science goals and design constraints in
anticipated applications. We follow with an overview of the sys-
tem in Sec. IV and descriptions of its hardware and firmware in
Secs. V and VI, respectively. We briefly describe the data stream-
ing system, integration with instrument control systems, and the end
user software environment in Sec. VII. Finally, we present the sys-
tem performance in Sec. VIII, in particular, demonstrating that the
SMuRF system meets or exceeds its design goals.
II. SUPERCONDUCTING RESONATOR READOUT
There are many scientific applications that utilize supercon-
ducting microwave resonators as the sensing and/or readout element
for ultra-sensitive circuits, including but not limited to supercon-
ducting cryogenic sensor arrays for both low-bandwidth signals and
pulse detection, qubit control and readout, and quantum informa-
tion storage and addressing. 7,13,34,35 These applications have a large
range of signal bandwidths ranging from <1 Hz to 10s of kHz or
faster. There is generically a trade-off between signal bandwidth and
channel count: to fit large numbers of sensors in the usable readout
bandwidth the detectors must be bandwidth-limited, while larger-
bandwidth detectors utilize a greater fraction of the total readout
bandwidth and cannot be packed as tightly in frequency space. To
maximize performance on the smaller number of channels being
used in the higher-bandwidth cases, system linearity is more limited,
meaning that the fewer channels may be run before performance
begins to degrade.
Since the RF linearity requirements for the high channel den-
sity case drive the SMuRF hardware design, in particular, we focus
here on low bandwidth, high-channel-count applications, such as
transition-edge sensor (TES) bolometer or MKID arrays, for astro-
nomical sensing. We further focus on the case of μmux coupled to
low-bandwidth TESs, since the higher resonator drive powers and
flux ramp demodulation present additional complications beyond
KID systems. In this section, we briefly review key terms pertaining
to resonator readout and give a brief overview of the TES-coupled
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-2
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
μmux system and typical integration to orient the reader for later
sections.
A. Microwave resonators
The microwave resonators used for cryogenic detector readout
are coupled to a common RF transmission line to enable multiplex-
ing. The RF transmission line is excited with input microwave power
to interrogate the state of each resonator simultaneously. This input
power can be broadband noise, or as is more often the case for high-
channel count systems with known resonance frequencies, probe
tones tuned to each resonance frequency. We typically operate the
RF line in transmission mode and adjust the power levels at the res-
onator inputs with attenuation on the input and amplifiers on the
output. In the discussion that follows, we assume that the resonators
are coupled to the RF line such that they exhibit a dip in forward
transmission(S21) amplitude on resonance; other systems are easily
mapped onto this case.36
An example resonator S 21 is plotted in Fig. 1. In this idealized
case, the resonance frequency fres corresponds to the minimum of
the transmission amplitude at the center of the resonance, though in
general resonances can be asymmetric. The complex phase under-
goes a sign change through the resonance. The width of the reso-
nance in frequency space is characterized by the resonator quality
factor Q, which is related to the width of the resonance Δ f at
full width half maximum by Q= fres/Δ f . We further differentiate
between the internal quality factor denoted Qi where Qi ≡Q/Smin
21
and the coupling quality factor Qc, where the total Q is related to
the coupling and internal quality factors by 1/Q= 1/Qc+ 1/Qi. The
complex forward transmission through an idealized resonance may
be parameterized as
S21( f) = 1−Q
Qc
1
1+ 2jQx , (1)
where x= ( f −fres)/ fres is the fractional detuning from the reso-
nance frequency.3
We can equivalently plot the S 21 from Fig. 1 in the complex
plane, where the resonance traces out a circle with the resonance
FIG. 1. Example S21 amplitude (top) and phase (bottom) vs frequency for an ide-
alized resonator. The resonance frequency fres corresponds here to the minimum
of transmission. The width characterizes the sharpness of the resonance, which is
inversely related to the quality factor Q.
frequency at the point of intersection with the real axis, as shown
in Fig. 2. For an ideal resonance, this circle is positioned such that
on resonance the transmission is entirely real and small changes
in the resonance frequency result in changes in transmission along
the imaginary axis, or phase quadrature of the resonator. The real
axis corresponds to the amplitude quadrature. The effects of cabling
and loss, however, may in general displace, scale, and/or rotate
the resonance circle to an arbitrary position in the complex plane.
We may equivalently refer to the amplitude and phase quadra-
tures of the resonator as I and Q, respectively, which are related
by the same rotation and scaling to the electronics voltage I and Q
quadratures.
B. The microwave SQUID multiplexer
The microwave SQUID multiplexer (μmux) transduces a cryo-
genic detector signal, typically from a transition-edge sensor (TES)
or a magnetic microcalorimeter (MMC), into flux in an RF SQUID
loop.14,15 Flux in the SQUID loop changes the effective inductance of
the microwave resonator, causing a shift in its resonance frequency.
A separate and common flux ramp bias simultaneously applied to
all channels linearizes the SQUID response without the need for
individual feedback lines.37 An incoming detector signal is therefore
transduced into a phase shift in the SQUID response to flux ramp,
which is periodic. A simplified picture of this phase modulation
scheme is depicted in Fig. 3.
The SQUID flux to resonance frequency relation is a quasi-
sinusoidal relation parameterized at low drive power by the peak
to peak swing of the resonance frequency Δ fpp and hysteresis para-
meter λ, where lower values of λcorrespond to more sinusoidal
curves. It is commonly parameterized as37
Δ f(t) = B( λcos(ωct+θ(t))
1+λcos(ωct+θ(t)) ) , (2)
where B is a constant related to Δ fpp. We note that Eq. (2) does not
fully capture the complexity or dependencies of the SQUID curve,
which is a subject of intense study.38
The SMuRF system hardware was designed for high linear-
ity use cases with large channel counts. The current firmware was
optimized for reading out microwave SQUID devices fabricated
by the Quantum Sensing Group at NIST Boulder for use with
CMB detector arrays, referred to throughout this text as “NIST
FIG. 2. (Right) Example resonance circle corresponding to an ideal resonance,
with magnitude response (left) for reference. The Smin
21 is denoted with a star in both
cases. The color gradient denotes the same points in frequency in both panels. We
see that the resonance generically traces out a circle in the complex plane, with
the diameter of the circle corresponding to the depth of the resonance.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-3
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 3. An overview of the phase modulation scheme of μmux. The top panel
depicts the resonance frequency, which shifts in response to flux in the SQUID
loop. The middle panel gives the flux ramp, which is typically driven in a sawtooth
pattern with amplitude sufficient to drive many flux quanta through the SQUID (in
this case, 4). The bottom panel gives an example detector signal, which varies
slowly compared with the flux ramp. The detector and flux ramp signals both con-
tribute flux to the SQUID; thus, the resonator response to the detector signal is a
shift in the phase of the flux ramp modulated frequency shift (dark dotted lines on
top panel) from the detector signal-free case (light lines on top panel).
CMB-style μmux resonators.” 16 The design values for these res-
onators are resonator bandwidths of Δ f ∼100 kHz, peak to peak
frequency swing of Δ fpp ∼100 kHz, quality factor Qi > 100 000,
and λ∼1/3. They are optimally driven with input powers around
Pin ∼−75 dBm. The devices are being developed for the even-
tual goal of achieving a multiplexing factor of 2000 channels from
4 to 8 GHz on a single RF line, but have thus far achieved O(900)
channel multiplexing factors in integrated systems.21 We emphasize,
however, that the SMuRF is largely agnostic to resonator configura-
tion aside from resonator frequencies, bandwidths, quality factors.
Unless otherwise indicated, the devices used here for the major-
ity of testing were variations on the NIST μmux100k design, which
achieve approximately their design values with mean Qi ≈120 000,
bandwidth Δ f ≈115 kHz, resonator spacing 1.9 MHz, and greater
than 99% yield. 16 Other resonator technologies, such as MKIDs,
TKIDs, and even room-temperature resonators, have been success-
fully read out with SMuRF systems as well, but did not drive design
choices.
The maximum multiplexing factor is set by the design value
of the peak to peak swing Δ fpp and the requirement that the reso-
nances are spaced apart by a factor of 10 times Δ fpp in frequency
to avoid collisions and crosstalk. In general, μmux devices have
roughly matched resonance bandwidth and peak to peak frequency
swings to maximize SQUID sensitivity without causing hysteresis or
pathological SQUID responses.15
Reconstruction of detector information is achieved by exciting
the resonators with power and monitoring their state. The sig-
nal chain consists of a comb of microwave-frequency resonators
capacitively coupled to a single RF transmission line. Each detec-
tor is uniquely identified by its resonance frequency through a 1:1
mapping between detectors and SQUID input coils. Since the ini-
tial resonance frequencies of the resonators can be measured in
advance, the resonator excitation is often achieved with a comb of
excitation probe tones, each tuned to a single resonator channel.
In typical microwave resonator electronics systems, the resonator
acts as a moving notch (narrow bandstop) filter that shifts off
the probe tone, and each probe tone is monitored for changes
FIG. 4. A typical integration between the SMuRF system and cryostat. The SMuRF
system consists of RF and DC components that interact with the cryostat. The
number of RF pairs may change depending on the multiplexing factor achieved by
the cold devices. The DC lines supply the biases for RF amplifiers and detectors
as well as the flux ramp. The system additionally interacts with several peripherals,
including an optional external timing reference and data acquisition system (DAQ).
Throughout this paper, the color scheme is kept broadly consistent such that the
main system computation and processing is given in green, RF components are
depicted in light blue, DC components in purple, data output in pink, timing in yel-
low, the control in orange, and the cryostat and other externally derived parameters
in red.
in amplitude and phase. As will be discussed more in depth in
Sec. III B 2, the RF linearity requirements on a system that must
accommodate the possibility of several thousand off-resonance
probe tones are stringent, motivating SMuRF’s unique tone-tracking
capability.
C. Typical μmux system implementation
In this subsection, we describe a typical implementation of
a μmux system to motivate the electronics and peripheral sys-
tem designs. The superconducting detector arrays are mounted at
the cold stages of a cryostat and connected to room-temperature
electronics systems via cabling that is passed through the cryostat
vacuum feedthrough. A sketch of a typical system integration is
given in Fig. 4.
The SMuRF electronics interface with a cryostat through both
RF and DC connections. The RF connections consist of two RF ports
per transmission line, one each for input and output. The DC con-
nection is made with a single multipin hermetic connector, which is
carried to colder temperature stages by a wire loom that is broken
out at the 50 and 4 K temperature stages to provide amplifier biases
and filtering of the flux ramp and detector bias lines.
The RF lines provide the signals that are carried via coaxial
cables to the resonator transmission line. After interacting with the
resonators, the transmitted power is amplified with one or more
cryogenic RF amplifiers before being returned to the warm electron-
ics for processing. In μmux, the resonators are coupled to the TES
detectors, which must be biased for operation. In addition to the TES
bias lines and RF amplifier bias lines, the DC lines must also supply
a flux ramp line to the SQUIDs.
III. REQUIREMENTS
The SMuRF system and auxiliary components must satisfy
many performance criteria in order to meet the design specifications
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-4
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
of the experiments they are coupled to. Here, we outline briefly
the system requirements driven by the expected functional require-
ments in Sec. III A, the science goals in Sec. III B, and the user
needs in Sec. III C. A summary is given in Table I. These design
requirements are ultimately driven by the goal of reading out 2000
μmux-coupled TES channels in a 4–8 GHz bandwidth, each with
∼−75 dBm input power, while maintaining total readout noise sub-
dominant to the detector noise for a small-aperture telescope with
no polarization modulation. After describing the SMuRF system in
detail, we demonstrate that the designed and built system meets
these requirements in Sec. VIII.
A. Functional requirements
We first list the signals and connections that the SMuRF system
is expected to provide, based on the typical system implementation
discussed in Sec. II C.
The RF system of SMuRF must provide one RF signal gener-
ation and readback pair per cryostat coaxial line. The multiplexing
factors achieved by μmux are set by the cryogenic devices, which
are currently being designed for channel densities of about 500 res-
onators per 1 GHz of bandwidth across the 4–8 GHz range. For
1000× multiplexing factors, we thus require two pairs of coaxial
cables, while for 2000 × multiplexing factors only a single pair is
TABLE I. A brief summary of major requirements for the SMuRF system. We indicate the main requirement driver briefly, with further discussion given in the “Requirement
section” column. The table is organized to group requirements driven by the cryogenic multiplexer, interfacing TESs, and environmental operating conditions together. The
performance of the SMuRF system demonstrating meeting the requirement is given in the corresponding “Performance section” column.
Title Requirement Driven by
Requirement
section
Performance
section
RF connections 2 pairs of SMA connections with Cryogenic multiplexer: Resonator Section III A Section V B
2 GHz bandwidth each bandwidth (100 kHz expected) and
density (1000 channels per
2 GHz of bandwidth)
Flux ramp Minimum 10 μA at 10 kHz Cryogenic multiplexer: Flux ramp Section III A Sections V C
sawtooth reset rate input coil inductance and modulating and V D
above resonator frequency noise
Crosstalk −60 dB RF isolation between channels Cryogenic multiplexer: Subdominant Section III B 4 Section VIII E
across 1 GHz and lower than 1 part to measured device properties
in 104 for demodulated sensor data and mitigating crosstalk
due to noise floor from
intermodulation projects
Dynamic −100 dBc/Hz per tone at 30 kHz offset Cryogenic multiplexer: Electronics Section III B 1 Sections VIII A
range for 2000 simultaneous channels white noise subdominant to cryogenic and VIII B
multiplexer and total readout noise
subdominant to detector noise
Linearity Minimal performance degradation Cryogenic multiplexer: Maximum Section III B 2 Section VIII A
for 2000 channels across expected density (1000 channels
per 2 GHz of bandwidth)
Amplifier 4 pairs of wires supplying ± 2 V Cryogenic multiplexer: 2 chains Section III A Sections V C
biases and O(10) mA each each containing an amplifier and V D
at 4K and an amplifier 50K
to achieve sufficient ADC power
Bandwidth Flux ramp demodulated data TESs: Detector bandwidth Section III B 3 Section VIII D
resolving 1 kHz waveforms (limited to a few kHz for stability)
TES biases Between 10 μA and 5 mA of current with TESs: Detector design parameter Section III A Sections V C
excellent low-frequency stability and V D
Temperature Temperature coefficients TES and environmental: TES Section III B 1 Section VIII B
stability 20 ppm/ ○C or better bias temperature stability
(assuming worst case, operation
in Atacama diurnal variations
with no temperature control)
Environment System operation at 5200 m above sea Environmental: Conditions in the Section III C Section VIII F
level and 25○C ambient temperatures Atacama Desert, Chile
Power Total system (including peripherals) Environmental: Electrical power Section III C Section VIII F
consumption consumes roughly 200 W per 2000 channels available at observing sites
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-5
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
needed. Based on NIST CMB-style μmux design specifications, we
require that SMuRF can generate up to 2000 probe tones at about
∼−35 dBm each across 4 GHz of total bandwidth, allowing for cold
attenuation prior to the resonator input.
For science operations, the TESs are usually operated with a
constant low-noise voltage bias. In calibration mode and to drive the
detectors out of their superconducting state, a higher bias level must
be supplied, though this state is subject to looser requirements on
the noise performance. Depending on the design and operating con-
ditions of the TES, the bias line may be required to supply between
∼10μA and∼5 mA of current.
The electronics should additionally provide low-noise DC
biases for the cryogenic amplifiers. Previous measurements indicate
that cascaded cryogenic amplifiers offer improved IP3 for minimal
noise temperature penalty compared with typical noise in the cryo-
genic resonators. 19 In this case, a lower gain, low noise amplifier
(LNA) at 4K operates as the first-stage amplifier followed by a 50K
amplifier, which may operate at higher powers and thus offers bet-
ter linearity than a single 4K amplifier alone. For other applications,
a single LNA may be sufficient. The LNAs are biased with a gate
and optional drain DC line that supply no more than ± 2 V and
O(10) mA. We thus require the electronics supply bias lines for up
to two cryogenic amplifiers per transmission line, which we refer to
throughout the text as located at 4K and 50K, though they are not
required to be fixed at these temperature stages.
Beyond these DC signals, the electronics must include a low-
frequency signal generation system that supplies the flux ramp line
common to all resonators on the same coaxial line. To modulate
the TES signal above the 1 /f knee of superconducting resonators, 3
we require that the flux ramp line achieve at least 10 kHz Φ 0 rate,
defined as the sawtooth reset rate multiplied by the number of flux
quanta swept per ramp. The required amplitude of the flux ramp
depends on the mutual inductance to the SQUID, but must be able
to sweep several Φ 0. Assuming there is no current division in the
cryostat to suppress noise, this places the minimum requisite current
at about ∼10 μA for current device designs, which have couplings
between the flux ramp coil and SQUID of about O(30) pH.16,37
To mitigate against unwanted pickup from ambient radio fre-
quency interference (RFI), cables carrying critical low frequency bias
signals between the warm electronics and cryostat input connectors
must be well-filtered and kept as short as feasible.
The electronics should interface with a control computer,
allowing the user to command the system and receive data. The
system should further provide the ability to interface with external
timing systems such as provided from experiment or observatory
control. While standalone laboratory test systems may be able to
stream data directly to disk, we require that the SMuRF system
be capable of interfacing with external data acquisition systems as
required by large-scale experiments. We similarly require that a
SMuRF system be capable of communicating with and operating
alongside other SMuRF systems for large-scale deployments.
B. Science-driven requirements
Here, we describe the requirements driven by the science goals
of CMB small-aperture polarization experiments operating without
additional polarization modulation. These are ultimately require-
ments on the total readout system, encompassing both cryogenic
readout and warm electronics. In general, we require that the warm
electronics contribute minimally to noise, bandwidth, and crosstalk
relative to the cryogenic components. In this section, we thus outline
the requirements on the warm electronics such that this condition
holds.
1. Noise
The ultimate figure of merit for the readout noise performance
is the noise referred to the detector input. The noise performance has
two components: the white noise and the low-frequency behavior.
Achieving good noise performance places stringent constraints on
all of SMuRF’s subsystems, including but not limited to: RF tone
generation and channelization, detector bias drives, flux ramp,
and all digital signal processing (DSP) algorithms. Since the low-
frequency noise on the detector bias line directly contributes low-
frequency noise on the detectors, noise performance and stability of
the low-frequency subsystems is particularly crucial.
a. White noise. The white noise requirement of the readout,
which includes both the cryogenic readout devices and warm elec-
tronics, is set by the requirement that it be subdominant to detector
noise referred to the input. For uncorrelated noise contributions
to the total detector noise the various noise components add in
quadrature; thus, in order to have minimal impact, we require
the readout electronics induce no more than 10% penalty to the
detector noise. CMB TES detectors are currently photon-noise lim-
ited, with noise-equivalent powers of O(40) aW/
√
Hz at 95 GHz. 39
We operate in the regime that total readout noise is subdomi-
nant to phonon and Johnson noise of the TES, which are in turn
subdominant to photon noise. The amplitude of the TES photon
noise-equivalent current is set by the operating resistance, which
varies widely across experimental configurations from about 1 to
30 mΩ for DC-biased systems.21,40 For CMB detectors with antenna
responses centered at 95 GHz, this translates roughly to O(100–160)
pA/
√
Hz for a BICEP-like experiment with large operating resis-
tance and Simons Observatory-like experiment with a low operating
resistance, respectively.21,39
To maintain low total readout noise, we require that the added
white noise due to the warm electronics be subdominant to the
intrinsic noise of the superconducting resonators and cryogenic
amplifiers, whose combined noise in turn is required to be subdom-
inant to the detected signals. For NIST CMB-style μmux resonators,
the dominant readout noise sources include two-level systems (TLS)
in the resonator dielectric, HEMT noise, and digital-to-analog con-
verter (DAC) noise. 41 To incur no more than 10% penalty in the
total current noise, this places an overall requirement on the readout
at roughly O(45–70) pA/
√
Hz, which includes both the cryogenic
devices and warm electronics.
For the purposes of setting a requirement on the warm elec-
tronics, we must relate the detector input-referred current noise to
more practical units. Here, we define several quantities relating to
RF electronics systems that set the engineering specifications for the
SMuRF systems.
In μmux systems, detector signals are modulated into the side-
bands of the drive tones at an offset frequency given by the product
of the flux ramp sawtooth rate and the number of RF SQUID Φ 0
swept in each ramp, typically 4–6 kHz and 4–6 Φ 0, respectively, to
get above the strong 1/f -like component of the resonator noise. The
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-6
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
difference between the power of the drive tone and the noise floor
generated in the sidebands of the tone by the warm electronics at this
offset frequency determines the maximum usable RFdynamic range.
The dynamic range is often expressed in units of dBc/Hz, or decibels
relative to the carrier integrated over the measurement bandwidth,
where the carrier is taken as the resonator probe tone and the mea-
surement bandwidth is typically 1 Hz. Alternatively, we can assign
the maximum power of the carrier or analog-to-digital converter
(ADC) as “full scale” and express power levels relative to this maxi-
mum in terms of decibels relative to full scale (dBFS). While we are
typically interested in the dynamic range above the effective noise
floor, we may at times consider the strength of the carrier signal
above the strongest spurs, or the spur-free dynamic range (SFDR).
A sketch of these concepts for an arbitrary carrier and noise floor is
given in Fig. 5.
The maximum achievable dynamic range is limited by both
noise and nonlinearity in the active devices used to amplify,
up- and down-mix, and read out the tones. In general, there are
tradeoffs between noise and RF nonlinearity; while lowering drive
power may improve the noise due to intermodulation products
produced by device nonlinearities, the dynamic range is eventually
limited by the thermal noise floor of the electronics. Conversely,
improving signal to noise over the thermal noise floor with higher
drive powers eventually results in an increased effective noise floor
due to intermodulation products of the probe tones. We operate in
the regime that the electronics dBc/Hz is not changed by attenua-
tion, as is generally the case for broadband RF electronics in this
parameter space.
The referral from electronics noise in dBc/Hz to TES noise
equivalent current involves converting noise in electronics phase to
resonator frequency noise via resonator and SQUID device para-
meters and referring to detector input-referred noise via factors of
SQUID couplings. The full derivation and measurement is deferred
to a separate publication. To remain subdominant to the intrin-
sic noise of NIST CMB-style μmux resonators, the requirement for
the SMuRF electronics RF dynamic range per tone is −100 dBc/Hz
at 30 kHz offset frequency when operating 2000 simultaneous
FIG. 5. A sketch of a carrier tone roughly centered within the displayed band-
width to illustrate various terms relating to dynamic range. The dynamic range
is measured at some offset frequency from the main carrier and represents the
strength of the carrier signal relative to the noise floor. The noise floor may contain
narrow-band spurs; thus, the spur-free dynamic range represents the strength of
the carrier relative to the largest spur within the bandwidth.
channels. This channel density goal is driven by the maxi-
mum expected density of the cryogenic multiplexer under the
μmux100k design.16
The input-referred noise in the TES detector bias line is cur-
rent divided between the shunt resistor and the TES. The ratio of
the shunt resistance to the TES resistance under typical operating
conditions is about 0.1. This sets the requirement on the noise on
the bias line to 10 times the requirement on the current noise of the
readout; for example, if the detector input-referred electronics noise
requirement is 10 pA/
√
Hz, the noise on the TES bias line must be
≲100 pA/
√
Hz. The current noise requirement for a given applica-
tion can vary widely depending on the TES operating resistance, but
we require that the bias line current noise be<50 pA/
√
Hz, which is
conservative for most DC voltage-biased TES arrays.
The flux ramp has a smaller mutual inductance on the SQUID
input coil than the TES, typically by a factor of 10. For μmux100k,
the design values for the TES input and flux ramp mutual induc-
tances are 227 and 13.3 pH, respectively.16 In order to further reduce
noise, the flux ramp may be current divided inside the cryostat. We
assume no current division in the worst case and the same conser-
vative 5 pA/
√
Hz total electronics noise requirement, resulting in a
flux ramp current noise requirement of<50 pA/
√
Hz.
b. Low-frequency noise. For mm-wave ground-based bolomet-
ric applications in particular, minimizing the 1/f noise of the detec-
tor time-ordered data is critical. 42 The conversion between angular
scale on the sky and time-ordered data frequency depends on the
telescope scan strategy. CMB ground-based surveys targeting large-
scale sky features, such as the BICEP/Keck program, require time-
ordered data that is white down to ∼0.1 Hz. Thus, in the absence
of additional polarization modulation we target the 1 /f knee of
the electronics to be ∼0.01 Hz. This low-frequency performance
encompasses both the RF and DC subsystems, the latter presenting a
particularly challenging constraint since any low frequency noise on
the detector bias line directly translates to additional low frequency
noise on the detector.
The primary components of the SMuRF system, which drive
the low-frequency noise requirement, are, in approximate order of
impact, (1) the detector bias circuit, (2) the flux ramp circuit, (3) the
RF signal circuit, and (4) the RF amplifier circuit. The detector bias
circuit is especially critical since fractional drifts in detector bias cur-
rent couple directly into fractional drifts in the mean detector signal
and gain in the high loop gain limit of TES responsivity.
The low frequency drifts in the SMuRF-provided bias current
are sourced by intrinsic 1/f noise of the DACs and op-amps used in
the bias circuit and by the coupling between bias circuit components
(current-setting resistors and DAC voltage references) and the tem-
perature of their environment. We choose DACs and op-amps such
that their intrinsic 1/f contribution is subdominant to the tempera-
ture coupling effects. In this limit, the dominant driver of 1/f noise
is the temperature dependence of the passive circuit components.
These components must maintain anfknee ∼0.01 Hz even when cou-
pling to the extreme case of diurnal ambient temperature variations
in the Atacama Desert where many CMB observatories are currently
operating or being built, assuming no active temperature control.
This sets the requirement for the combined temperature coefficient
of all components in the TES bias circuit to be≲20 ppm/○C.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-7
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
The flux ramp is typically operated at 10 s of kHz, allowing
for some relaxation of 1/f requirements on individual components.
Since the flux ramp demodulation scheme relies on knowledge of the
average flux ramp rate over long periods, the stability of this circuit
is crucial. We find that the required component temperature stabil-
ity and noise performance are comparable or subdominant to that of
the detector bias circuit; thus, choosing similarly rated components
for both circuits suffices to meet this requirement.
The RF signal circuit low-frequency noise performance, defined
here as the dynamic range at small carrier offset, is set by the stabil-
ity of the local oscillator (LO), discussed further in Sec. V B. Due to
the flux ramp scheme of μmux, the requirements on low-frequency
noise in the RF circuit and low-frequency variation of the LO posi-
tion itself are not as stringent and are subdominant to other sources
of 1/f noise.
The SMuRF provides circuitry for cryogenic RF amplifier bias-
ing, as outlined in Sec. V D. These amplifiers are typically sourced
commercially and are robust to gain fluctuations due to noise in the
bias circuit. Flux ramp modulation is expected to further suppress
the majority of 1 /f noise. The phase modulation scheme of μmux
additionally offers some amount of immunity to overall amplitude
fluctuations resulting from amplifier gain noise.
2. RF linearity
Here, we set requirements on the system to minimize 3rd-order
intermodulation products that degrade the RF dynamic range. The
full octave of readout bandwidth used for this application places
stringent requirements on the bandwidth of the RF components in
the amplification and signal processing chain.
For fixed-tone readout where the RF probe tone is fixed while
the resonance is modulating, thousands of unattenuated tones are
incident on the cryogenic amplifier as the resonances move in fre-
quency. This is a particular challenge for μmux systems both due
to the higher probe tone powers and since the resonance swings by
O(1) resonator bandwidth in operation. To accommodate this large
change in power, the cryogenic amplifier must trade off noise tem-
perature, thus degrading the overall readout noise. The interaction
of the RF probe tones further generates third-order intermodula-
tion products in-band; for 2000 RF tones in one octave of bandwidth
there are over 1 × 109 third order intermodulation products whose
total power grows as the cube of the fundamental tone power. These
intermodulation products combine and form an irreducible pseudo-
noise floor that degrades the dynamic range of the probe tones and
may exceed the −100 dBc/Hz requirement discussed above, adding
to the detector-referred readout noise. In addition to sourcing noise,
intermodulation products induce crosstalk between channels that
poses potential systematics for science analysis.43
SMuRF addresses this linearity problem with a tone-tracking
algorithm, which follows the modulating resonance with a closed-
loop adaptive filter-based feedback. Previous results demonstrate
that this tone tracking is sufficient to add negligible noise penalty
when running O(400) channels simultaneously vs a single chan-
nel at a time for NIST CMB-style μmux resonators.16,19 The impact
of adding additional channels is dependent on resonator proper-
ties, most crucially the resonator dip depths. For the full system, we
design with the goal of sufficient linearity such that there is minimal
penalty incurred by additional channels for up to 2000 NIST CMB-
style μmux channels on an RF line. This sets a stringent requirement,
in particular, on the RF components, including the ADCs, DACs,
and RF mixers, as discussed in Sec. V B.
We emphasize that there is generically a trade-off in RF systems
between noise temperature and linearity; the noise may be improved
at the expense of being able to operate fewer channels simultane-
ously. For the SMuRF system the large channel counts necessitated
aggressive optimization for linearity at scale, but the noise perfor-
mance of the SMuRF system for a small number of channels can be
improved.
3. Bandwidth
The required sampling bandwidth for the readout electronics is
driven by the bandwidth of the detectors and the bandwidth of the
resonator. For CMB measurements, the science readout bandwidth
is typically in the 0.1–300 Hz range. 10,44 This gives us a minimum
bandwidth for reading out TES bolometers of O(1 kHz) per detec-
tor channel across a minimum of 2000 channels. The detector noise
itself extends higher in frequency; to keep the TESs stable, they are
designed to have bandwidth in the∼kHz range.2
For applications that require the reconstruction of fast pulses,
such as calorimetry, the energy resolution is set by the rise time
and height of the pulse. 45 In this case, the SMuRF must be recon-
figured for lower channel count, higher bandwidth channelization
and signal processing.
The requisite TES readout bandwidths stated above are for
the flux ramp-demodulated detector data, whose sample rate is set
by the flux ramp rate. While the tone-tracking ability of SMuRF
allows for readout of resonator modulation faster than the res-
onator bandwidth, it is still useful to use the resonator bandwidth
as a heuristic for required per-channel readout bandwidth. The res-
onator bandwidth for NIST CMB-style μmux resonators is designed
to be ∼100 kHz, well above the TES bandwidth. To avoid aliasing
penalties and get above the 1/f noise from two-level systems (TLS)
in the resonator, we flux ramp-modulate the signal to O(10 kHz).
For the SMuRF to be capable of resolving O(10) kHz flux ramp
rates, the per-channel digitization bandwidth requirement is set at
O(1 MHz) to ensure enough samples per flux ramp cycle to allow
for demodulation.
Additional bandwidth and aliasing considerations of the μmux
devices are discussed in a separate publication. 46 For the purposes
of checking performance for CMB-style resonators, we require that
the system is capable of resolving and demodulating waveforms with
frequencies up to∼1 kHz.
4. Crosstalk
Crosstalk between channels contributes to unwanted signal
that biases scientific analyses. For CMB polarization analysis, the
crosstalk between channels is held below 0.3%. 42 The sources of
signal crosstalk in the μmux cryogenic subsystem have been investi-
gated and largely mitigated through cryogenic device design.43 Most
pertinently for SMuRF, the noise floor induced in part by the higher
order intermodulation products of tones contributes some amount
to an “all-into-all” form of crosstalk. We expect that the RF linear-
ity requirement outlined in Sec. III B 2 is sufficient to address this
form of crosstalk. In particular, the −100 dBc/Hz for 2000 tones
requirement translates to a maximum−43 dBc leakage between arbi-
trary channels in 1 GHz bandwidth. To be conservative, this sets a
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-8
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
minimum requirement of−60 dB isolation between channels in any
given 1 GHz bandwidth.
Beyond the linearity requirement, there may remain some
amount of crosstalk between channels in the electronics. The NIST
CMB-style μmux resonator is expected to dominate any crosstalk
contribution from the SMuRF electronics. 16 We thus require sim-
ply that the electronics-induced crosstalk be subdominant to the
crosstalk induced by the cryogenic resonators.
C. Ancillary design requirements
We note here several additional design constraints guided by
the unique operating environments encountered by SMuRF and
similar microwave resonator-based systems.
●Environment: The SMuRF electronics are expected to oper-
ate in a wide range of ambient temperature conditions
without noise penalty. In the worst case, the electronics are
air-cooled in ambient conditions. Additionally, many CMB
experiments operate at high altitudes where oxygen levels
are substantially lower than sea level. Extra care must be
taken to ensure that the electronics do not overheat or
otherwise fail in these conditions. The SMuRF was designed
to operate at altitudes up to 5200 m above sea level with
ambient temperatures below 25○C.
●Power: Each SMuRF system’s maximum power consump-
tion must fit within the power budget of the intended appli-
cation. For high altitude astronomical observatories that
often operate on a sparse total power budget, this poses a
significant constraint due to the high signal and switching
speeds, the computationally intensive nature of the SMuRF
processing algorithm, and the power demands of the elec-
tronics crate and peripherals. For reference, the total elec-
trical power available for readout for current sites is about
O(1–3) kW for 20 000 channels.
●Modularity: Components of the system should be designed
to allow for separate testing and integration, allowing for
swapping and upgrading parts as necessary on deployed
systems.
●Ease of Use: The user-facing interface and software should
be accessible to end users who may desire to use SMuRF
as a readout platform without expert knowledge of the
electronics, firmware, or cryogenic multiplexer. This drives
the SMuRF design toward modular components that are
easily swappable, open source software, and compatibility
with standard scientific laboratory computers and operating
systems.
IV. SMuRF ELECTRONICS OVERVIEW
The SMuRF electronics are built on the SLAC Common Plat-
form, a comprehensive field-programmable gate array (FPGA)-
based firmware framework built on standardized hardware designed
specifically for high-performance systems. 47 The hardware compo-
nents are designed for modular use with commercial Advanced
Telecommunications Computing Architecture (ATCA) crates. 48
The hardware architecture is based on a Xilinx FPGA carrier board,
which supports up to two double-wide dual-height mezzanine cards
for analog and RF processing and a rear transition module (RTM)
for high speed links and further customization. A block diagram of
the full SMuRF system is given in Fig. 6.
The system consists of an FPGA carrier card, which provides all
real-time signal processing. Mounted to the carrier are one or two
Advanced Mezzanine Cards (AMCs), which each consist of a base
board and an RF daughter card. The base board contains the ADCs
and DACs for the main signal path, clock generation, and local
oscillator (LO) generation. RF daughter cards mounted to the AMC
base boards contain the RF mixers, amplifiers, and bandpass filters.
Opposite the AMCs on the carrier card is a Rear Transition Module
(RTM) handling the low frequency signal generation, which is con-
nected via a flexible multipin cable to a cryostat card that interfaces
the low frequency signals with the cryostat. Additional peripherals,
such as the crate, timing, and networking, are required to run the
system, but may be shared between multiple systems.
Multiple parallel systems reside in a single commercial ATCA
multislot crate, with each system occupying one slot. Timing infor-
mation is distributed through the crate backplane. Typical crates
contain N+ 1 slots, with N carrier cards and one slot dedicated to
a network switch (Vadatech ATC807) that allows for data stream-
ing across multiple SMuRF systems. A 1 Gbit ethernet connection
between the ATCA network switch and the control server, com-
monly a Dell R440, provides firmware register access for every
SMuRF carrier in the 7-slot ATCA crate, allowing for software con-
trol and data acquisition. For large integrations, an additional PCIe
card (Xilinx KCU1500) allows for streaming data from multiple car-
riers to the server. This specific hardware, including the PCIe card,
Vadatech ATCA network switch, and Dell R440 computer server,
has been qualified for operation in high-altitude environments as
described in Sec. VIII F.
Up to two AMCs fit into designated mezzanine slots on the
FPGA, each with four up/downconverters corresponding to one
of eight 500 MHz wide bands. The firmware framework is built
on these 500 MHz-wide bands that can each accommodate pro-
cessing and streaming of up to 416 simultaneous 2.4 MHz-wide
channels. For each band, the tones are synthesized in the DACs
and upconverted to the appropriate GHz frequency range with a
local oscillator. Tones returning from the cryostat are split into
bands and downmixed with the same LO before being sent to the
corresponding ADC. The downmixed tones are digitized, chan-
nelized, and read into the FPGA, where they are processed. Each
channel is typically associated with a unique resonance, creating
a 1:1 mapping between readout channels and detectors. Thus, in
total, each SMuRF system contains the requisite hardware to read
out 3328 resonator channels across 4 GHz of bandwidth, either
in two parallel systems reading out resonators in 2 GHz of band-
width or in two serial systems reading out resonators in across a
4 GHz range.
Each channelized tone is processed by the firmware to return
data with desired levels of processing depending on the application.
At the lowest level, the downconverted and channelized data can
be streamed as the orthogonal I and Q components of the digital
down conversion. Following calibration, these orthogonal compo-
nents may be returned as the amplitude and phase components
of the resonator voltage fluctuations, or an approximation of the
probe tone frequency and resonator frequency error Δ f . With this
frequency error approximation, a feedback loop may be applied to
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-9
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 6. A sketch of a full SMuRF system. Each system consists of an FPGA carrier board (green) that supports both the RF (blue) and DC (purple) systems. Multiple systems
may be run in parallel in a single crate. The RF system (blue) consists of two Advanced Mezzanine Cards (AMCs), each with a pair of RF daughter cards that interface
between the RF cabling to the cryostat and the ADC/DACs. The LOs used for up- and downmixing signals between the baseband and RF are derived from the main carrier
but are generated on the AMCs. The DC system (purple) provides the amplifier biases, TES biases, and flux ramp generation on a Rear Transition Module (RTM). The voltage
sources are further conditioned in a cryostat card that interfaces directly with the cryostat. The main signal processing functions take place on the carrier, and consist of a
pair of polyphase filter banks for RF tone synthesis and readback and a baseband processor for per-channel computations. Several options exist for interfacing timing and
data acquisition with the system; displayed here are streaming to a PCIe card installed in the control server and receiving an external clock reference. An ethernet connection
between the control server and network switch provides firmware register access to all slots simultaneously and may receive data streamed to disk for a small number of
carriers. Not pictured is the ATCA crate backplane, which distributes power and timing information and connects the network switch ports to the carriers in each slot.
minimize Δ f , thus following the resonator minimum. This “tone-
tracking” feedback enables the applied probe tone to “follow” the
resonance dip as it is modulated by the flux ramp and/or incoming
detector power.
A more detailed discussion of the options for data process-
ing is given in Sec. VI. At the highest level of processing, the
SMuRF returns a time-ordered data stream of flux ramp demodu-
lated detector data for saving to disk or passing on to downstream
data acquisition.
V. HARDWARE
A full picture of the hardware components is shown in Fig. 7.
The components displayed constitute the pieces of one SMuRF sys-
tem, which is capable of reading out up to 3328 channels in one
rack-unit of space, excluding peripherals that are shared between
multiple systems. These components consist of a main FPGA car-
rier (Sec. V A) that mounts up to two Advanced Mezzanine Cards
(Sec. V B) with RF daughter cards and a Rear Transition Mod-
ule (Sec. V C). They are mounted in one slot of a multi-slot
ATCA crate, and present SMA ports for RF connections from
the front of the crate and a flexible multipin cable to a card
(Sec. V D) mounted directly at the cryostat vacuum feedthrough
at the back of the crate. An optional PCIe card (Sec. V E) in the
control server provides a data streaming interface for large-scale
implementations.
A. Carrier card
The FPGA carrier card (Xilinx XCKU15P Ultrascale+) handles
the real time signal processing, most notably the RF tone genera-
tion/channelization and tone tracking. The card provides interfaces
for data, control, and timing. An Intelligent Platform Management
Interface (IPMI) provides a serial control protocol for monitoring
and power cycling. A single-lane 2.5 Gbit uplink provides on board
timing and a frequency reference, while a 4-lane 10 Gbit/s ether-
net interface to the ATCA crate switch via the backplane handles
all other communication, including data transfer. The AMC (see
Sec. V B) interface with the carrier consists of eight 12.5 Gbit bi-
directional JESD204b links to each AMC card for ADC/DAC data,
digital clocks, and low-speed serial peripheral interfaces (SPI) for
control and status readback. The carrier interfaces digitally with
the RTM via SPI link and provides 51.2 MHz clock (see Sec. V C).
The RTM additionally routes two optional external 2.5 Gbit external
inputs to the carrier, one for ethernet and the other for timing.
The firmware on the carrier card is programmed via VHDL and
Xilinx System Generator for Digital Signal Processing and may be
updated remotely. Further firmware details are addressed in Sec. VI.
Due to the large resource consumption of the signal process-
ing firmware and the need for many carriers to operate in close
proximity in high altitude environments, the carrier is robustly tem-
perature controlled with large heatsinks, delidded regulators, and
high-velocity crate fans. The results of testing of these temperature
control measures is described in Sec. VIII F.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-10
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 7. A picture of the hardware for one SMuRF system accommodating up to 3328 resonator channels across one or two RF chains, excluding peripherals, such as the
server, data streaming, and timing. The pictured contents excepting the cryostat card occupy one slot in a multi-slot ATCA crate. The AMCs with RF daughter cards mount
to the front of the carrier and present SMA connectors for RF connection to the cryostat, while the RTM mounts to the rear of the carrier and presents a multipin cable to a
cryostat card, which mounts directly to the cryostat. The RTM and cryostat card combination supplies the low-frequency signal generation and conditioning.
B. Advanced mezzanine cards and RF daughter cards
The Advanced Mezzanine Card (AMC) contains the ADCs and
DACs for the main RF signal path, clock generation system, and
LO generation for the RF daughter cards. Each AMC consists of a
base board interfaced with an RF daughter card supporting a total
of 2 GHz of bandwidth at either 4–6 or 6–8 GHz. The RF daugh-
ter card provides the up- and downmixing between the digital signal
processing (DSP) band centered at 750 MHz and the RF frequencies
of the microwave resonators. The current iteration of SMuRF has
RF daughter cards for operation of either “low band” (4–6 GHz) or
“high band” (6–8 GHz) resonators. The daughter cards may be arbi-
trarily swapped between AMC base boards, which require only min-
imal modification between low and high band types. Each carrier
card accommodates two AMCs of any combination of low band and
high band types. The LO frequency may be modified via firmware
register. Combined with RF hardware part swaps, this allows for
for operation of SMuRF systems with cryogenic resonators at other
frequency ranges and channel densities.
1. AMC base board
The AMC base board contains the hardware for interfacing
the digital logic on the carrier with the analog electronics. A block
diagram is shown in Fig. 8.
Each AMC baseboard features four 16-bit 2.4 GS/s ADCs
(TI ADC32RF45) and four 16-bit 2.4 GS/s DACs (TI DAC38J84).
The SMuRF implements I/Q data separation digitally using
Digital DownConversion (DDC) rather than use integrated analog
I/Q combiners and separators. In this scheme, rather than imple-
menting separate I and Q hardware paths, a single high-speed ADC
samples the full input signal, which is then separated into orthogonal
components via multiplication with a directly synthesized inter-
mediate frequency (IF), filtered, and downsampled to obtain the
complex baseband signal. This relaxes the requirement on precisely
matching the gain and maintaining the phase offset between the
I and Q components. However, DDC requires higher speed DACs
and ADCs to do the I/Q combination and separation in firmware.
The DACs convert input complex data from the FPGA car-
rier card at 614.4 MS/s to a 500 MHz-wide filtered signal between
500 MHz and 1 GHz. The ADCs convert the unaliased input sig-
nal in the 500 MHz–1 GHz frequency range up to a complex data
stream at 614.4 MS/s to pass to the carrier. The ADCs and DACs are
run with 4× digital decimation and interpolation filters, respectively,
to define the Nyquist band and simplify analog filtering require-
ments. Data bandwidth limits prevent the ADCs from transmitting
wholly unprocessed ADC data and the DACs from processing arbi-
trary waveforms at the full data rate. The communication between
the carrier and the ADCs and DACs is therefore routed through a
12 Gb/s custom, open source JESD protocol.
Each DAC/ADC pair is associated with a unique local signal
generator to provide the LO that the RF daughter card uses to upmix
or downmix between the 500 MHz–1 GHz band and the desired
GHz-frequency band. Each 500 MHz band has its own LO, which
is offset by the ADC/DAC numerically controlled oscillator (NCO)
frequency of 2.4 MHz from the centers of 3.5, 4.0, 6.0, and 6.5 GHz
for the low band, and 5.5, 6.0, 8.0, and 8.5 GHz for the high band.
We use the lower sidebands for the first two LOs and the upper
sidebands for the second two such that the LOs fall outside the res-
onator bandwidth when operating AMCs of the same type (both
low and high bands). These LOs are generated via a fractional-N
locked phase-locked loop (PLL) IC (Analog Devices ADF5355) with
integrated low-noise voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs).
Finally, the AMC card contains a clock generation system (TI
LMK04828) for the digitizer and associated JESD204b links. This
clock, as well as all other SMuRF system clocks, is ultimately derived
from a common timing reference (Crystek CVHD-950).
Since the LO is used to generate all the tones in its respective
500 MHz band, its noise profile is critical to the overall noise per-
formance. Other studies find that the noise profile of the LO can
be seen in resonator channel noise spectra at high flux ramp rates,
which does not impact typical science data but may constrain the
maximum operable flux ramp rate. 46 The noise profile of the LO is
set by the noise of the reference clock source, the charge pump used
for loop gain adjustment, and the VCO. The phase noise of the clock
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-11
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 8. Block diagram of a SMuRF
Advanced Mezzanine Card (AMC),
which is responsible for the RF signal
input/output. RF signals enter the
system between 4 and 8 GHz and are
first split into 500 MHz bands via a
quadruplexer (bottom right). Each band
is then processed in parallel through
digitally controllable attenuators and
mixers (denoted with X) each with
an LO tuned to place the IF band in
the 500–1000 MHz range. The ADCs
(bottom left) then sample the IF of each
band at 2.4 GS/s. The RF output (up
conversion) chain starts from the DACs
(top left) and performs the same opera-
tions in reverse with the mixers fed by
the same LOs as the down conversion.
The separate bands are combined with
the quadruplexer, resulting in a comb of
output between 4 and 8 GHz at the RF
output (upper right).
reference source, the LOs, are locked to sets the close-in phase noise
(below∼100 Hz). An external clock reference can be passed in and
locked to the onboard clock either via a SMA input on the AMC
front panel or through a timing distribution system on the ATCA
crate backplane. If no external source is provided, the 122.88 MHz is
derived from the FPGA.
Above 100 Hz, the phase noise of the LO is set by the parameters
of the charge pump phase-locked loop (CP-PLL) that is used to cre-
ate a flat phase noise profile out to O(100 kHz). The noise level in
this flat portion of the phase noise profile can be adjusted slightly by
trading off bandwidth of the CP-PLL. Pushing to much higher band-
width above ∼100s of kHz leads to instability in the CP-PLL. The
phase noise after the CP-PLL rolloff is set by the intrinsic phase noise
of the VCOs that generate the LO, which ultimately limit the phase
noise level. For applications that require lower system phase noise,
the VCOs can be exchanged with lower phase noise, fixed-frequency
crystal oscillators. These were not used in the current design because
flexibility of LO frequency while achieving the required white
noise specification was favored over further improvements in phase
noise.
2. AMC RF daughter cards
The AMC RF daughter cards mounted to the AMC base boards
provide the RF frequency tone generation and readback. The RF
mixers (Analog Devices LTC5548) that provide the up- and down-
mixing between the DAC/ADC baseband from the AMC base board
and the LOs are contained on the RF daughter cards. Since the RF
mixer typically sets the linearity of the system, the choice of mixer
here is critical, as is the attenuation of DAC output power prior to
passing to the mixer.
The RF daughter cards exist in both low band (4–6 GHz) and
high band (6–8 GHz) variants. Quadruplexers (Lark Engineering
SMCQ819-110 and SMCQ819-111) interface from the mixers on
the four ADC/DAC pairs to a single input/output coaxial pair that
connect with the cryostat or other test system via SMA connectors.
Cavity filters within the quadruplexers define overlapping bandpass
filters that split the RF frequency band into each 500 MHz band
that is synthesized or channelized in firmware. Since the ADCs and
DACs are clocked at 2.4 GS/s, the Nyquist frequency for the alias
band is at 1.2 GHz.
The AMC S 21 response for each 500 MHz band is shown in
Fig. 9. We note, in particular, that the maximal passband of the
filters is not quite 500 MHz wide to guarantee sufficient rejection
out of band, set at 60 dB isolation between bands as described in
Sec. III B 4. The portion of the passband that is flat within −2 dB
is about 460 MHz wide, while the edges of each band are about
3 dB down and isolation is > 65 dB between adjacent bands. The RF
daughter cards additionally include programmable attenuators on
both the RF input and output for each 500 MHz band to allow for
flattening the RF signal levels over the full SMuRF RF bandwidth.
Since the ADCs and DACs have optimal noise performance at a
fixed output/input power level, respectively, adjusting power levels
at the resonator is most easily accomplished via some combina-
tion of external attenuation/amplification and these programmable
attenuators. With existing default settings, the optimal output/input
power levels are about −33 dBm per tone. Individual tone powers
are adjustable in firmware in coarse (3 dB) steps, while the pro-
grammable attenuators act on each 500 MHz band defined by one
ADC/DAC pair and can be tuned in finer (0.5 dB) steps. The size of
firmware steps can be modified easily in firmware, but the present
combination of coarse and fine steps has been sufficient for user
needs.
C. Rear transition module
The rear transition module (RTM) generates the following low
frequency signals for the SMuRF system: (1) detector biases, (2) RF
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-12
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 9. The response of the AMC band-
defining filters for each of the 500 MHz
wide bands across the full 4–8 GHz
SMuRF band. Band 0 corresponds to the
4–4.5 GHz band, and the bands count
upward in 500 MHz increments from
there.
amplifier biases, and (3) flux ramp. It additionally provides control
and clocking to the cryostat card.
The RTM acquires its sequencing and interfaces via a complex
programmable logic device (CPLD), which runs a simple, compact
firmware programmed in VHDL. The CPLD firmware cannot be
updated remotely.
The DC TES biases and cryogenic amplifier biases are pro-
vided by 33 low-noise 18-bit DACs (Analog Devices AD5780). To
reduce low-frequency noise, the TES bias DACs are typically oper-
ated differentially, though they can be driven single-ended with no
modifications to the SMuRF hardware or firmware to double the
number of independent TES bias lines.
As discussed in Sec. II C, for applications requiring high RF lin-
earity, it may be desirable to cascade two cryogenic amplifiers rather
than use a single LNA. Thus, the RTM allocates eight DACs to bias-
ing up to four total RF amplifiers, typically two amplifiers placed
at 4K and 50K for two separate RF chains. Each amplifier is allo-
cated two DACs for the gate and drain voltages, though some models
require only a single bias line. Additional amplifier bias lines can be
added at the expense of TES detector bias lines with no modification
to the RTM hardware or firmware, if desired. These DACs, referred
to as “slow,” can generate arbitrary waveforms up to about 1 kHz for
calibration and testing purposes.
An additional 50 MS/s 16-bit differential current DAC (Ana-
log Devices LTC1668) drives a differential pair that serves as the
flux ramp for μmux systems. Since the flux ramp is required to
be much faster than the detector and amplifier biases and oper-
ates at lower full scale voltages, it is higher speed and therefore
higher noise than the DC bias DACs. The flux ramp is implemented
as a sawtooth function, although other waveforms are possible. It
is generated by the RTM CPLD with control and triggering from
the carrier card FPGA. The RTM finally provides DC power and
a low speed SPI serial link for communication to the cryostat card
(see Sec. V D).
A daughter card on the RTM consists of a voltage reference
providing buffered ± 10 V reference signals to the precision DACs.
The card uses two commercial voltage references (Analog Devices
LTC6655) in parallel to reduce noise, and low-pass filters with
low acoustic sensitivity capacitors (Rubycon 35MU106MD35750)
to mitigate vibrational pickup. A daughter card implementation for
the voltage reference provides the flexibility to easily and cheaply
upgrade the performance of the voltage reference if required for a
particular application.
The RTM presents a 100-pin SCSI connector containing the
low-impedance flux ramp, TES bias, amplifier bias, DC power sup-
plies, and digital communication to the cryostat card. The SPI com-
munication link between the RTM and the cryostat card is default
quiet to reduce noise during operation, with no active polling.
Two monitor ports with LEMO connectors are available for
laboratory diagnostics. First, the flux ramp monitor port outputs a
single-ended 50 Ω -impedance signal for monitoring the flux ramp
output. This line is not guaranteed to have the requisite noise sta-
bility or bandwidth for properly driving the flux ramp. Second,
the trigger output provides a low voltage transistor-transistor logic
(TTL) signal asserted at the start of each flux ramp period, typically
at the resets for the sawtooth signal.
An SFP 1 Gbit ethernet port may be used for data streaming of
a single SMuRF system without the need for interfacing with the rest
of the ATCA crate. An additional SFP port receives timing data that
may be used for synchronizing multiple SMuRF systems together, as
discussed in Sec. VI D.
D. Cryostat card
The cryostat card interfaces signals from the RTM directly with
the cryostat. It conditions the TES bias and flux ramp signals from
the low-impedance voltage sources at the output of the RTM to
filtered, high-impedance current sources. Since the bias lines are
particularly susceptible to noise pickup after converting to current
sources, the cryostat card was designed to be placed as close to
the cryostat as possible, with a separate card and enclosure from
the main RTM to allow for shielding and thermal regulation. The
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-13
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
connector on the cryostat side is chosen to match the feedthrough of
the desired application.
The cryostat card additionally provides regulated power sup-
plies and conditions gate bias voltages from the RTM DACs to bias
the cryogenic RF amplifiers. The card is controlled and monitored
via an on-board microcontroller (Microchip PIC32MX795 32-bit
microcontroller) and interfaces to the rest of the SMuRF system via
an SPI serial link to the RTM CPLD.
The detector bias is a differential output voltage using two
opposing± 10 V RTM DACs. For each detector bias line, mechan-
ically latching relays on the cryostat card (Axion 5-1462037-4)
controlled by the microcontroller allow for switching between a
low-pass filtered, low-current bias circuit (“low current mode”) and
a higher current, minimally filtered ( ∼100 kHz bandwidth) cir-
cuit (“high current mode”). The relays are mechanically latching to
reduce power dissipation that could couple to temperature variation
in the board, meaning the state cannot be queried during operation.
The default state is in low current mode.
In low current mode, added parallel capacitance low pass filters
the detector bias output with a frequency cutoff f3dB ∼8 Hz. The
output current levels in both low and high current modes are set with
inline series resistors, typically in the 1–50 k Ω range depending on
the maximum current desired, providing a high impedance source.
The maximum current is thus determined by the resistor selection,
which is set by individual detector operating parameters, up to op-
amp limits of ∼10 mA. The high current mode is typically used for
delatching superconducting detectors, biasing detectors with higher
operating resistances for calibration purposes, or for high bandwidth
measurements.
As discussed in Sec. III C, we set stringent requirements on the
low frequency performance of signals provided by the cryostat card.
It is expected that temperature variation of electronic components
drives a large fraction of the variation in the low frequency noise,
particularly the temperature variation in the RTM voltage reference
and cryostat card resistors. This sets a requirement of ≲20 ppm/○C
on the temperature coupling coefficient of these resistors. The cryo-
stat card resistors were thus chosen to be guaranteed to± 10 ppm/○C
(TE Connectivity RQ73 series). The capacitors on the cryostat card
were similarly selected for low frequency noise performance and low
acoustic sensitivity (Rubycon).
The 4K and 50K amplifier gate bias voltages are each driven
single ended via an RTM DAC with 20 μF bypass capacitors on the
cryostat card for filtering. A resistor divider on the cryostat card
allows for limiting the output gate voltages to less than the maxi-
mum amplifier ratings if required. The drain currents may be read
back to allow for bias adjustment using an inline resistor on the
input to the regulator, which is amplified by an instrumentation
amp and read back by ADCs on the microcontroller. The flux ramp
and amplifier bias cryostat card circuits have jumpers that allow the
user to manually select between sourcing from the RTM and insert-
ing signals from an external source via a two-pin differential LEMO
connector.
All output voltages, including the RF amplifier drains, are
disabled by default on power-on, and must be explicitly enabled.
This is a requirement for many cryogenic RF amplifiers, which
can draw large currents and generate substantial heat loads if the
drain voltage is enabled before the gate voltage is set. For the RF
amplifier drain voltages, which are generated on the cryostat card
using adjustable linear voltage regulators, this is accomplished by
toggling the enable pin of the linear regulators using the cryostat
card peripheral interface controller (PIC).
The cryostat card provides an additional DC line at +12 V
with minimal filtering for powering an optional warm follow-on
RF amplifier, which can be used to optimize the cryostat RF output
signal power levels into the AMC RF ADCs. For general diagnos-
tic purposes, it can report its temperature using an on-board TI
TMP236 temperature sensor over the SPI bus.
The flux ramp is a differential output current source drive, con-
verted from the RTM low-impedance voltage source via a passive
resistor H-pad attenuator to allow impedance matching if required
by the application. A mechanically latching relay allows for switch-
ing between AC- and DC-coupled modes via large capacitors. In AC
mode, large acoustic sensitive capacitors (Rubycon) are used to mit-
igate against vibrational coupling. Operating in AC mode high-pass
filters the differential flux ramp drive with an f3dB ∼80 Hz, atten-
uating 60 Hz power line noise and low frequency noise pickup in
the cables between the RTM and cryostat. Operating in DC-coupled
option enables low-frequency and fixed-current flux ramp biasing
as required, such as when taking μmux resonator frequency vs flux
ramp bias curves or other device characterization data.
E. PCI express card
For large integrations, a Xilinx KCU1500 data acquisition PCI
express (PCIe) card using a custom firmware allows for multi-
ple carriers’ worth of data to be streamed to a server, with each
slot outputting to a 10 Gbit fiber link on the network switch. 49
The PCIe firmware implementation is designed for a 7-slot ATCA
crate configuration, with the PCIe card interfacing with up to six
SMuRF carriers through the Vadatech switch via dedicated ethernet
links to an eight lane PCIe 3.0 bus in a server computer (com-
monly a Dell R440). The dedicated ethernet link for each SMuRF
carrier is implemented with 10 Gbit fibers that connect from the
ATCA ethernet switch to two Quad Small Form-factor Pluggable
(QSFP) transceivers in the KCU1500. The PCIe card presents two
× 8 interfaces bifurcated to a × 16 edge connector to the server.
During data taking, each SMuRF carrier transfers data frames at
the flux ramp rate to the PCIe card, where the frame stream is
received and processed further in software. Common software pro-
cessing steps include packaging the data with an application-specific
header, which can include timing information, and optionally fil-
tering and downsampling the data streams before writing the data
to disk.
VI. FIRMWARE
The FPGA carrier card firmware is responsible for SMuRF
computation, including RF tone generation, tone tracking, flux ramp
demodulation, and data framing. A component block diagram is
given in Fig. 10. The SMuRF firmware components provide the
following functionality:
●Tone generation and channelization (Sec. VI A): A pair of
polyphase filter banks provide synthesis and analysis of the
RF tones used to probe the resonators. The filter banks are
shown as the blue boxes in Fig. 10.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-14
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 10. Block diagram of the main components of the SMuRF firmware. Some
miscellaneous tasks are not shown for simplicity. The blue boxes represent a pair
of polyphase filterbanks that provide the synthesis and readback of the RF tones
used to probe the resonators. The green box contains the baseband processor,
which acts on each channel separately to perform the calibration and frequency
error estimation, then the tone-tracking and flux ramp demodulation. The filter
banks and baseband processor act on hardware-defined 500 MHz-wide bands.
One SMuRF FPGA carrier card supports up to 8 bands, allowing for a total of 3328
channels per board. Auxiliary firmware functions such as timing synchronization,
data framing, and low-frequency signal generation are represented by the yellow,
pink, and purple boxes, respectively.
●Frequency error estimation (Sec. VI B): SMuRF uses an
affine transform to translate the received complex response
(S21) into a resonator frequency error estimate. As this
occurs on a per-channel basis, it is contained in the baseband
processor (green box in Fig. 10).
●Tone tracking and flux ramp demodulation (Sec. VI C):
SMuRF uses a feedback loop to update the probe tone fre-
quency, attempting to minimize its estimate of the frequency
error. The feedback loop parameterizes the flux ramp mod-
ulation and also outputs the demodulated detector signal.
This is also part of the baseband processor.
●Miscellaneous (Sec. VI D): The firmware handles miscel-
laneous timing and waveform synthesis tasks, such as flux
ramp timing, arbitrary detector bias DAC waveform genera-
tion, data streaming, and synchronization between multiple
SMuRF systems. These are shown with the timing (yellow),
DC signal generation (purple), and DAQ (pink) boxes in
Fig. 10.
Intermediate data outputs with increasing levels of signal pro-
cessing are available to examine for system characterization and
debugging. The total resource consumption of the firmware is
discussed in Sec. VI E.
A. Tone generation and channelization
The SMuRF FPGA synthesizes and analyzes data from each
of 500 MHz bands corresponding each to one RF ADC/DAC
pair separately. The RF ADCs and DACs transform the IF band
from 500 MHz to 1 GHz to and from the complex baseband of
± 307.2 MHz, defined by the ADC sample rate of 2.4 GS/s and
divide-by-4 complex decimation filter. From here, the data are
downconverted from a 614.4 MHz-wide frequency band to indi-
vidual channels to be processed. A conceptual sketch for the single
channel downconversion chain is given in Fig. 11. The upconversion
works similarly, but in reverse.
A polyphase filter bank performs the channelization, con-
verting from each 614.4 MHz I/Q stream to 512 interleaved 2.4
MHz-wide bins that are time multiplexed. The filter bank response is
shown in Fig. 12. The filter bank oversamples by 2 such that each res-
onance falls into multiple bins; two resonances that fall in the same
bin may be assigned to an overlapping bin such that both resonators
are processed. Thus, a given 1.2 MHz frequency band may not con-
tain more than three resonances such that every resonance can be
assigned to its own bin. The firmware is capable of being altered
to support processing multiple channels per bin if desired, but cur-
rently uses only one channel per bin. Placing a single channel per bin
introduces additional latency due to the lack of parallelization, but
reduces FPGA resource consumption. NIST CMB-style μmux res-
onators aim for at least 1 MHz spacing betweenμmux resonances for
crosstalk considerations; thus, the width of the filter bank channels
does not significantly contribute to readout yield degradation.43
FIG. 11. Conceptual diagram of the downconversion process for a single SMuRF
channel. Heuristically, the process works as follows: (1) The incoming data x[n]
consists of N channels separated in frequency space across the 614.4 MHz-wide
output of the ADC, centered each at frequency θk for k = 1, 2,. . ., N. (2) Each
channel is centered by multiplying with the inverse of the channel center frequency
e−jθk n. (3) A digital low-pass prototype filter is applied. (4) We downsample by
M = 256 to arrive at a 2.4 MHz-wide single-channel output. This process is imple-
mented in parallel for N= 512 channels via the analysis filter bank. The similar
upconversion process occurs via the synthesis filter bank in the reverse order.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-15
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 12. A zoomed-in section of the
filter bank response for 16 interleaved
2.4 MHz wide channelization bins. Note
that the channels are oversampled by
2 such that the bins are overlapping
with each other. The filter bank converts
between 614.4 MHz of bandwidth and
512 time multiplexed bins that are each
2.4 MHz wide.
The data from each bin are filtered with a 16 tap digital low-
pass filter, resulting in a 4096 tap finite impulse response (FIR) filter
(since there are 512 resulting channels, oversampled by 2). The filter
bank achieves about 100 dB of rejection for out of band response
and adds a group delay that is approximately constant across the 2.4
MHz-wide band.
This filter sets the majority of the processing delay due to
SMuRF, on the order of 6 μs out of a total signal processing delay
of about 8.8 μs. For comparison, the roundtrip cable delay through
a typical CMB receiver cryostat may be about 100 ns, and the
additional delay from the ADCs and DACs another∼0.5 μs.
The FFT is performed with a streaming Radix 2 2 architecture
to convert between the frequency and time domains.
The tone frequencies are defined with a 24-bit input to a direct
digital synthesis (DDS) system. This results in a frequency resolu-
tion of 0.1431 Hz for probe tones, which is essentially continuous for
practical purposes. A 10-bit look-up table and Taylor series correc-
tion generates the probe tone per channel, which is amplified to the
desired output tone power and converted back to the full frequency-
multiplexed bandwidth via the synthesis filter bank. The DDS system
achieves greater than 100 dB spur-free dynamic range (SFDR) over
the synthesis filter bank per-channel bandwidth of 2.4 MHz. The
DDS continuous synthesis allows for fine frequency resolution and
fast, phase-continuous frequency switching necessary for continu-
ously updating the tone frequency with tone tracking, as discussed
in Sec. VI C.
The 512 time-multiplexed channels output from the polyphase
filter bank are processed in two parallel streams by the baseband
processor, which performs the per-channel calibration and feedback
operations discussed in Secs. VI B and VI C. While the filter bank
channelizes the full 614.4 MHz bandwidth, we use only the center
500 MHz per AMC as defined by hardware filters. To reduce power
consumption on the FPGA, the edge channels are dropped from
processing, resulting in 499.2 MHz of bandwidth covering 208 time
multiplexed channels per baseband processor stream for a total of
416 channels available per 500 MHz band. While dropping the edge
channels adds the complication of converting the 614.4 MHz stream
from the ADC to a 499.2 MHz stream for processing, the slower
clock speed is critical to fitting the baseband processor computations
within the resource limits of the FPGA.
For each channel, the ADC output is digitally downconverted
with the output from the DDS to center it about 0 Hz. At this point,
the data may be optionally output as per-channel orthogonal I and
Q streams for offline test and debugging purposes. Application of
calibration (as discussed in Sec. VI B) transforms this data into tone
frequency and frequency error between the output tone and the res-
onator frequency. Finally, an adaptive loop filter configured with
feedback parameters (as discussed in Sec. VI C) outputs flux ramp
demodulated data at the flux ramp frame rate, and feeds back to the
DDS to update the output tone frequency during tracking.
After interacting with the baseband processor, the time-
multiplexed processed channels are padded from 499.2 MHz back
to the 614.4 MHz bandwidth and synthesized into a 614.4 MHz I/Q
stream via the synthesis filter bank. A user-defined delay may be
added to correct for any system delays due to cabling, processing, etc.
before being passed to the DAC. The relevant frequency domains of
the channelization and synthesis process is given in the main RF loop
in Fig. 10.
B. Frequency error estimation
Following the tone synthesis and analysis, the SMuRF electron-
ics can be thought of as a system that is capable of generating tones
and reading back the complex response as a channelized stream of
orthogonal in-phase and quadrature components, typically denoted
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-16
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
I and Q, respectively. This I/Q stream may then be processed by
the baseband processor, which acts on each channel serially. A
conceptual diagram of the baseband processor is given in Fig. 13.
For μmux systems, we are typically interested in modulation
of the resonance frequency due to incoming power on the detector.
We thus seek to transform our complex digital data to an estimate
of resonator frequency shifts. We transform shifts of the resonance
frequency into shifts entirely in the phase (Q) direction of the res-
onator response via a rotation and scaling of the resonator’s complex
response, allowing us to ignore changes in the amplitude direction
(I). Equivalently, we rotate the resonator circle in the complex plane
such that it is oriented as given in Fig. 2 and approximate small
movements near the resonance frequency as occurring along a single
axis.
The resonance frequency is estimated as the point of mini-
mum amplitude response, which is true for an ideal resonator and
a good approximation for typical NIST CMB-styleμmux resonators.
Resonance frequency estimation is performed in software; thus
other metrics may be supported by the SMuRF system as various
applications require.
The resonator has a response in the complex plane correspond-
ing to the real and imaginary components of the S 21 response. This
response may be rotated and scaled by a complex number ηsuch
that for small changes in resonance frequency, the change in S 21 is
entirely in a single quadrature.
For (I±, Q±), the complex transmission measured at frequency
offset± Δ f from the resonance frequency, we estimateηas
η= 2Δ f
(I+−I−)+ i(Q+−Q−) . (3)
We see that the denominator gives an angle in the complex plane by
which to rotate the resonance circle, while the overall magnitude is
set by the sharpness of the resonance. Thus,ηhas the effect of rotat-
ing and scaling the resonance circle such that the real and complex
axes have physically meaningful units and with the S min
21 rotated to
be parallel to the imaginary axis.
With this calibration, the frequency shift may then be
estimated as
Δ f ∼ˆΔf ≡Im[S21(Δ f)× η], (4)
where S21(Δ f) is the complex transmission at the shifted resonance
frequency. Throughout this text, we denote estimates with a hat.
This estimate is equivalent to projecting the rotated and scaled S 21
response at the probe tone frequency onto a single axis. A sketch of
this calibration scheme is given in Fig. 14.
The estimate holds for small changes in frequency and in the
limit that shifting the resonance frequency away from the tone is the
inverse of shifting the tone, i.e.,
∂S21( f −fres(ϕ))
∂ f =−∂S21( f −fres(ϕ))
∂ f res(ϕ) , (5)
where f is the probe tone frequency and fr is the resonance fre-
quency, which depends on the flux ϕ. This assumption is valid for
most resonator-based readout systems in the small signal limit, i.e.,
where the frequency shift Δ f is small compared with the resonance
bandwidth. Figure 15 shows the estimated frequency error ˆΔf using
theηcalibration vs the true frequency error Δ f .
The ηestimate must be performed once per resonance, typi-
cally at the first cooldown for a set of resonators. The calibration
is largely stable between data-taking sessions and fridge cycles for a
given set of devices, and saved for reuse between device cooldowns.
Subsequent to ηcalibration, the SMuRF is capable of channelizing
tones and returning the output tone frequency and frequency error,
interpreted as the resonator frequency offset from the probe tone,
for each resonator simultaneously.
C. Tone tracking and flux ramp demodulation
We implement a feedback loop to minimize the SMuRF esti-
mate of the frequency error magnitude and continuously update the
probe tone to be positioned at the estimated resonance frequency.
FIG. 13. The per-channel baseband processor. This acts on each of the channels serially, clocked at 499.2 MHz. Various intermediate points are available to examine for
debugging and more detailed characterization, or the final demodulated data is passed to the data streamer for packaging and writing to disk or to external DAQ. External
inputs are shown in red, FPGA computations are shown in green, interactions with the filter banks are given in blue, and options for data outputs are in pink.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-17
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 14. A sketch of the calibration and frequency error estimation. (Left) An uncalibrated resonator generically has some response in the complex plane that may be
arbitrarily rotated and scaled. A probe tone (orange) is initially tuned to the point of minimum transmission Smin
21 (red), but as the resonator is modulated by flux the S min
21 will
shift away from the probe tone. (Right) Following calibration by ηas defined in Eq. (3), the resonance circle is scaled such that the axes are in physically meaningful units
and the small changes in the resonance frequency correspond to movements in only one axis. The frequency error Δ f between the probe tone and the new resonance
frequency is estimated as the projection (green) of the probe tone complex response onto a single axis, corresponding to Eq. (4).
When using the microwave SQUID multiplexer, the detec-
tor signal is reconstructed via phase shifts in the flux ramp
response, which are linear in detector signal for detector sig-
nals much slower than the flux ramp rate. For recent generations
of NIST CMB-style μmux resonators with bandwidth of about
100 kHz, we typically modulate the SQUIDs with flux ramp saw-
tooth rates of several kHz and 3–6 flux quanta swept per sawtooth
period.16
FIG. 15. Estimated frequency error with
the ηmultiplication (blue) vs real fre-
quency error for a simulated resonator
(orange). The regime in which the esti-
mated frequency error ˆΔf (blue) matches
the real frequency error is in a nar-
row band about the resonator frequency
(Δ f = 0). SMuRF tracks resonators
with tones in this narrow bandwidth while
flux ramping using an adaptive filter as
described in Sec. VI C.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-18
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
Rather than design a feedback loop to directly track arbi-
trary signals at 10s of kHz or faster, which is challenging due to
latency from the filter bank, we rely on the periodicity of the flux
ramp response. That is we express the flux-ramp modulated fre-
quency response of the resonator as in Eq. (2), reproduced here for
convenience,
Δ f(t) = B( λcos(ωct+θ(t))
1+λcos(ωct+θ(t)) ).
The carrier frequency fc =ωc/2πis the product of the flux ramp saw-
tooth reset rate and the number of flux quanta swept in a single flux
ramp period. For NIST CMB-style μmux resonators, the design val-
ues are a resonator peak to peak swing of about 100 kHz andλ∼1/3,
though this discussion applies without loss of generality to any suf-
ficiently periodic signal. 16 For detector signal θ(t) approximately
constant relative to ωct, we treat this as an estimation problem for
multiple sinusoids in a truncated Fourier series, where we have M
sinusoids of known frequencies. These frequencies are harmonics of
the carrier with known frequency fc but unknown in amplitude or
phase.
Thus, the resonance frequency of a given channel as function of
time is parameterized by
f[n]= constant+
M
∑
i=1
Ai sin(ωiTsn+θi)+ w[n], (6)
where we include a constant offset term and a Gaussian measure-
ment noise w[n]. Here, n is the sample number and Ts is the time
per discrete sample, which is Ts = 1/(2.4 MHz) as defined by the fil-
ter bank per-channel bandwidth. Expanding the sine terms, we can
rewrite the frequency as a sum of sines and cosines,
f[n]= constant+(
M
∑
i=1
ai sinωiTsn+ bi cosωiTsn) + w[n], (7)
where
ai = Ai cosθi, bi = Ai sinθi. (8)
In the limit of slowly varying θ(t), the ai and bi are approximately
constant, and the overall frequency estimate is linear in the ai, bi,
and constant offset. The change in phase of each harmonic is given
by Δarctan(bi/ai) = i× Δθi. As the detector signal modulates the
phase of the entire SQUID response curve, we seek an estimate of
the phase of the fundamental harmonic θ1 = arctan(b1/a1). Due to
FPGA resources, in the μmux system we take the number of tracked
harmonics M to be 3. In practice, this provides a sufficient parame-
terization of well-behaved SQUID curves on NIST CMB-style μmux
devices.
For M harmonics of a fundamental frequency ω1, Eq. (7) may
be rewritten as
⃗f = H⃗α+ ⃗w, (9)
where ⃗f and ⃗w are M× 1 column vectors of resonance frequency val-
ues and measurement noise for N discrete samples per flux ramp
frame. We define coefficient vector ⃗αas a (2M+ 1)× 1 column vec-
tor of sine and cosine coefficients a1, b1, . . ., aN, bN, constant for M
harmonics and a constant offset term. The harmonic sample matrix
H is an N× (2M+ 1) matrix given by
H=
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜
⎝
sin1[0] cos1[0] sin2[0] cos2[0] ⋅⋅⋅1
sin1[1] cos1[1] sin2[1] cos2[1] ⋅⋅⋅1
⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ... ⋮
sin1[N−1] cos1[N−1] sin2[N−1] cos2[N−1] ⋅⋅⋅1
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟
⎠
,
(10)
where
sinm[n]≡sin(ωmTsn), ωm = m× ω1 (11)
and similarly for cos m[n]. Our problem thus reduces to estimating
the coefficients vector ⃗α.
The current SMuRF tracking and demodulation loop imple-
ments this estimation using a recursive algorithm. The fundamental
tracking frequency f1 =ω1/2πis assumed known and must be mea-
sured using software tools (Sec. VII C) or input by the user. At
each discrete timestep n, a probe tone centered on a resonance has
frequency predicted as
ˆf[n]= a1[n]sin(ω1[n])+ b1[n]cos(ω1[n])+⋅⋅⋅+C, (12)
which may be thought of equivalently as the dot product of the nth
row of H with ⃗α. Simplifying notation, we can write the nth row of
H as ⃗h[n], given by
⃗h[n]= (sin1[n] cos1[n]⋅⋅⋅sinN[n] cosN[n] 1). (13)
Equation (12) is then written more compactly as
ˆf[n]= ⃗h[n]⋅⃗α[n]. (14)
We measure the frequency error as described in Sec. VI B
following Eq. (4) as
ˆΔf[n]≡f[n]−ˆf[n]≈Im(S21( ˆf[n]−fres[n])× η). (15)
Importantly, we measure only ˆΔf[n] and do not have access to the
true fres[n].
Based on this readback, we update the prediction via a feedback
loop such that
⃗α[n+ 1]= ⃗α[n]+μˆΔf[n](⃗h[n])T, (16)
whereμis a user-tuned gain parameter. This algorithm is equivalent
to the stochastic gradient descent method, where we are attempting
to minimize ˆΔf[n].50 Note that ˆf[n] and ˆΔf[n] are scalars cor-
responding to the probe tone frequency and estimated frequency
error, respectively, of a single channel at discrete timestepn. Sinceω1
is known, the flux ramp rate is no longer limited by the bandwidth
of the constant-only tracking loop, i.e., the N = 0 case.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-19
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
In this N = 0 case of no flux ramp such as with KID systems or
when slower tracking is desired, ⃗αreduces to a single constant fre-
quency errorα= Δ f . We further see that⃗h[n]is simply 1, and ˆΔf[n]
is the estimated frequency error, which is added to the previous con-
stant offset termαwith some gainμ. In this limit, a model with only
the constant offset term is equivalent to having only proportional
control in the tracking loop. The bandwidth of this operation alone
is about several kHz, setting the limit for tracking bandwidth in non-
flux ramped systems. Planned modifications for KID systems would
use the resources freed up by no longer using the higher harmonic
tracking to add a proportional gain term or a lead/lag compen-
sator to increase the loop bandwidth, allowing for higher bandwidth
applications, such as calorimetry.
Since this tracking loop estimates coefficients of the harmonic
content, the constant term encodes frequency shifts not directly
sampled by the harmonics vector ⃗h[n]. In the case of poorly selected
tracking frequenciesωi, this effectively aliases against the true mod-
ulation frequency and misconstructs the phase. The constant term
C absorbs slow shifts in the resonator frequency or the amplitude
of transmitted quadrature voltage through the resonator, potentially
suppressing sources of noise including but not limited to amplifier
gain fluctuations and microphonic pickup.
The user-defined parameters to the tracking algorithm are the
fundamental harmonic frequencyω1 and the gainμ. As is typical for
generic tracking feedback systems, the gain must be large enough to
guarantee convergence without causing stability issues. In practice,
there exists a broad range of gain values for which the feedback loop
is stable, with the gain determining the feedback loop bandwidth.
The fundamental tracking frequency f1 is independent of
the resonator bandwidth, and resonators centered in bins of the
polyphase filter bank can, in principle, be tracked as fast as the per-
channel Nyquist frequency, which for the SMuRF CMB firmware
implementation is 1.2 MHz. Resonator tracking at rates faster than
the resonator bandwidth may be desirable for several applications.
The tracking loop updates for each channel at the per-channel dig-
itization rate of 2.4 MHz; however, the stochastic gradient descent
method is only expected to converge on the mean phase over the
flux ramp period. 51 Therefore, while the tracked frequency of each
resonator is sampled at 2.4 MHz, detector information is only sam-
pled at the flux ramp rate. Because the tracking feedback loop acts
as a low pass filter, its bandwidth must be limited to at most half the
flux ramp rate through the choice of tracking gain μor pre-filtering
to avoid aliasing detector noise into the signal band. Combined with
the fact that increasing flux ramp rate modulates the detector signal
band to a region of lower TLS contributions, higher flux ramp rates
are generically preferred to reduce readout noise.46
To avoid losing lock on the feedback loop during the flux ramp
sawtooth resets, which cause a transient in the SQUID that are dif-
ficult to track, the tracking algorithm supports a user-tuned window
within each flux ramp frame to be “blanked off,” or removed from
the feedback loop. During this period, the coefficientsαare held con-
stant at the last updated value. The size of this window is typically
tuned to cover the sawtooth reset period and subsequent transient
response, and to maintain an integer number of flux quanta being
tracked in the active loop. Blanking introduces an aliasing penalty
due to the lower duty cycle, which is mitigated by keeping the
blanking window size as short as possible.
D. Other miscellaneous firmware functions
In addition to tone synthesis and readback, channelization,
frequency error estimation, and tracking, the firmware handles mis-
cellaneous functions, such as the data streaming interface, timing
synchronization between SMuRF and external systems, and control
and configuration of the AMCs, RTM, and cryostat card.
In the carrier FPGA firmware, the streaming data framer sums
the estimated coefficients of the first tracked harmonic a1, b1 as
discussed in Sec. VI C for each flux ramp frame and writes them
to a dual port RAM at the start of each frame. This effectively
averages over the flux ramp frame. From the dual-port RAM of
each baseband processor, the per-channel coefficients and chan-
nel ID information are combined into a full 4096 channel RAM.
The per-channel phase is computed serially as θ1 = arctan(b1/a1)
with a coordinate rotation digital computer (CORDIC) algorithm,
packaged with header information, and passed to the software
streaming interface. The header includes information about the
hardware configuration including the RTM DAC settings, includ-
ing detector bias settings, flux ramp status, timing counters and
synchronization bits, data rate, and optional user words. Addi-
tional coefficients from the higher harmonics of the tracking loop
could be added to the data stream for higher signal to noise perfor-
mance, but have not yet been found necessary and are not currently
implemented.
The arctan computation is clocked at 156.25 MHz. Since all
3328 channels must pass through a single CORDIC for the phase cal-
culation, this clock thus limits the per-channel streaming data rate
to 156.25 MHz/3328 channels ∼50 kHz. Since the flux ramp reset
rate in typical operation has not exceeded ∼30 kHz, this is accept-
able for current uses but could be upgraded to faster clock rates if
necessary. Faster data rates are available for writing directly to disk
for diagnostic and debugging purposes. These may be sampled up
to the per-channel digitization rate of 2.4 MHz per channel or the
decimated 614.4 MHz ADC speed for the full band without channel-
ization. Applications with fewer channels, such as high bandwidth
pulse detection applications, would also have higher data streaming
rates without the need for an upgraded clock.
The flux ramp sawtooth reset is triggered through one of three
possible modes: (1) internally, (2) through a trigger from a common
timing system, or (3) from an external TTL trigger on a LEMO port
on the RTM. The internal timing mode uses a 32-bit programmable
count limited counter in the FPGA, clocked at the complex base-
band processing rate of 307.2 MHz. The trigger and pulse width are
passed to the digital signal processing core for flux ramp demodu-
lation and to the CPLD, which has a 32-bit counter to receive the
external reset. The upper 20 bits of the CPLD counter are selected
to output to the flux ramp DAC on the RTM, which allows for bet-
ter flux ramp amplitude control. For large installations in which the
timing information is important, the external timing option allows
for higher precision and synchronization. The common timing sys-
tem was originally developed for accelerator systems and designed
for synchronizing large numbers of devices to sub-nanosecond pre-
cision.47 In this case, a separate timing card distinct from the SMuRF
carrier card generates a timing data stream at 2.4576 GS/s and
broadcasts timing words over a serial fiber. The timing words are
subsequently decoded by each individual SMuRF carrier card. These
words may be derived from an external timing system to allow for
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-20
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
synchronization between SMuRF and non-SMuRF timing systems
within a given experiment.
While the bulk of the firmware is located on the carrier card, the
PIC microcontroller on the cryostat card and the CPLD on the RTM
additionally run firmware. The RTM CPLD is nominally clocked
at 51.2 MHz to accommodate the maximum frequency of the flux
ramp DAC of 50 MHz, though the flux ramp DAC is typically oper-
ated well below this frequency. An arbitrary waveform generation
module containing a look-up table is capable of writing pairs of bias
DAC values sequentially, which allows for up to ∼1 kHz updates to
the DAC output voltages. Due to firmware resource limitations, the
CPLD interface is write-only, so to maintain a record of operations
we cache written values in FPGA shadow memory (BRAM).
The large-scale PCIe streaming interface splits incoming data
from the QSFP links to separate ports handling firmware register
access and streaming data, respectively. Up to six carriers, typi-
cally run together in a single 7-slot ATCA crate with a network
switch occupying the final slot. Each carrier’s register access and
data streaming ports are routed to the central processing unit (CPU)
via direct memory access (DMA) lanes. The register access port is
low-latency for fast commanding and access. Every pair of carri-
ers receives a dedicated 4 GB error correction code (ECC) DDR4
block, allowing for 2 GB of deterministic buffering per carrier before
the CPU RAM to avoid dropping packets due to CPU back pres-
sures on the DMA path. To prevent software data operations from
back pressuring the register access, the DMA lanes for register access
and data streaming are kept separate with independent PCIe DMA
descriptors.
E. Firmware resource consumption
A challenge for SMuRF was fitting the firmware within the
resource profile of the FPGA. The total FPGA resource consumption
profile is given in Fig. 16. We see that the most intensive elements
for the SMuRF involve memory and signal processing. The high
FPGA firmware resource usage and high 614.4 MHz clock rate is
near the device limits and require substantial firmware optimization.
We confirm that the requisite power draw and thermal environment
can be maintained within device limits for this configuration even in
high-altitude environments in Sec. VIII F.
VII. SOFTWARE
A block diagram of the SMuRF software interface is given in
Fig. 17. The FPGA is interfaced with a server via Rogue,52 a Python-
based hardware abstraction and data-streaming system (Sec. VII A).
Rogue registers are accessed via the Experimental Physics and Indus-
trial Control System (EPICS), 53 a control system architecture that
acts as a communication protocol between the firmware regis-
ters and the end user’s desired interface (Sec. VII B). For SMuRF
end users, the EPICS layer is further wrapped in the open source
pysmurf control software, which provides higher level processing
and analysis tools (Sec. VII C).54 Telescope control suite integration
and software for modeling and simulating SMuRF algorithms are
presented in Secs. VII D and VII E, respectively.
To guarantee a consistent software environment across multi-
ple deployed systems, the software suite is version controlled with
git55 and deployed to user institutions via dockers. 56 Furthermore,
each hardware component has a serial number programmed in
that may be remotely queried to facilitate hardware tracking across
multiple deployments.
A. Rogue
The Rogue system serves as the communication layer between
the FPGA firmware and the server software. It provides data stream-
ing and hardware abstraction in a clean, modularized format that
enables systems to be brought up from the prototyping phase to
the system integration and deployment stage. Firmware registers are
accessed via a hierarchical tree structure that encodes and optionally
commands the configuration and status of each register. A memory
API and data stream API separately handle FPGA memory access
FIG. 16. Total consumption profile of
fixed resources for the FPGA, a Xilinx
Kintex UltraScale + XCKU15P. The
terms are as follows: LUT = look-up
tables, LUTRAM = look-up table RAM,
FF = flip-flops, BRAM = block memory,
URAM = larger block memory, DSP
= digital signal processing blocks,
IO = input/output interfacing, GT
= gigabit transceivers, BUFG = global
clocking, MMCM= mixed-mode clocking
manager, and PLL= phase-locked loops
for clocking.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-21
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 17. A block diagram of the software components. A server (Dell R440) inter-
faces with the FPGA via Rogue via the EPICS framework. The pysmurf control
software provides the end–user interface with the system.
and data processing, respectively. The data stream may be passed
directly to downstream DAQ programs, such as telescope control
suites, as described in Sec. VII D. Metadata streams of any Rogue
process variable can also be streamed alongside the data at the data
rate, allowing for real time recording of important calibration and
state information.
B. EPICS
The Rogue firmware registers are accessed via Experimental
Physics and Industrial Control System (EPICS) process variables. 57
The EPICS interface provides a control system architecture with a
distributed real-time database of register values and a client/server
model with efficient communication protocol for passing data.
Existing infrastructure for EPICS is built on decades of experience
in designing and implementing large-scale control systems for sci-
entific instruments such as accelerator systems, including pre-built
software tools. It is currently actively developed and maintained by
an international collaboration of users across several large scien-
tific facilities. A channel access protocol connects the EPICS server,
which wraps the Rogue registers, to the client-side process variables
that may be queried, set, or monitored by any computer on the
same client network. EPICS process variable interaction may be con-
ducted in essentially any modern interface, including but not limited
to C/C++, Java, perl, python, Tcl/Tk, sh, and Matlab.
C. pysmurf control software
Since python is an open source language used extensively
for astronomical applications and laboratory experiment settings,
our primary user software suite is built in Python3. The pysmurf
control software serves as the interface for general users interact-
ing with the SMuRF system. The software provides the following
functionality:
●Wraps EPICS process variable control functions and pro-
vides data handling and low level commands, such as turn-
ing tones on and off, setting DAC voltages for detector and
amplifier bias, and acquiring time-ordered data.
●Provides utility functions for finding and characterizing res-
onators, setting up tone tracking, and acquiring flux ramp
demodulated data.
●Stores specific hardware configuration information such as
in-line wiring resistance, band frequencies, SQUID cou-
plings, and shunt resistances in a human-readable con-
figuration table that may be edited or referenced in later
analysis.
●Offers higher level control and analysis functions, including
but not limited to noise analysis, TES detector characteriza-
tion, and system optimization.
The repository is git controlled and actively managed at SLAC
to ensure continuity and cross-system compatibility as the software
advances.
D. Integration with telescope control suites
The pysmurf software suite and Rogue streaming interface
can be integrated with other experimental DAQ/control suites,
aligning detector data with information such as telescope pointing,
housekeeping, and observatory state. It is possible to either encode
syncwords in the frame headers or release frames based on sync sig-
nals for frame alignment. These syncwords, typically received from
an experiment common timing synchronization system, allow for
frames to be aligned offline, typically by a downstream frame pack-
ager or in post-processing. This integration has been successfully
demonstrated with the generic control program (GCP) obser-
vatory control suite in a test deployment with the BICEP/Keck pro-
gram, and has been built for the Observatory Control System (OCS)
in anticipation of deployment for the Simons Observatory. 20,58,59
Critical setup, calibration, and control functions may be received
by SMuRF from a central telescope DAQ. Optionally downsam-
pled data are digitally low-passed with a multi-pole Butterworth
filter with user-defined rolloff frequency. Useful registers may addi-
tionally be encoded in frame headers, allowing for streaming of
information such as detector bias levels and observatory timing
synchronization.
E. Simulation suite
To model the impact of the SMuRF firmware algorithms,
particularly in frequency error estimation and flux ramp demod-
ulation as described in Secs. VI B and VI C, these algorithms are
implemented in a publicly available Python simulation suite. 60 The
simulation suite takes as input real or simulated resonator and
SQUID characteristics, detector-referred input signals, and read-
out parameters such as flux ramp rate and tracking loop gain, and
outputs the flux ramp demodulated detector phase as would be out-
put by SMuRF. The details of this code and example studies of
the impact of various user-selected parameters on final detector-
referred demodulated data are presented elsewhere. 61 Integration
with the pysmurf user control software suite is planned for a future
release.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-22
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
VIII. MEASURED SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
SMuRF systems have been successfully integrated and used for
both laboratory and field measurements of CMB detectors, demon-
strating achievement of end-to-end system performance meeting
the goals of CMB experiments. 16,20,21 In this section, we explicitly
address the requirements as outlined by Sec. III. In particular, we
focus on demonstrating the capabilities of the SMuRF electron-
ics independent of the cold multiplexer as much as possible, such
that the effects of the cryogenic readout may be disentangled from
the warm components. Throughout this section, unless otherwise
specified, we operate a single SMuRF system consisting of a carrier
installed with one low-band AMC, one high-band AMC, and one
RTM in one slot of a 7-slot COMTEL ATCA crate. We use internal
timing and write data directly to the control server in all cases except
in Sec. VIII D, in which the PCIe streaming interface is used. The
system is interfaced with a cryostat card for the cryogenic testing in
Secs. VIII C and VIII D.
A. RF dynamic range and linearity
As outlined in Sec. III B 1, the RF dynamic range of the elec-
tronics in dBc/Hz, or the level of the total RF noise floor, is critical
to the readout white noise performance. The SMuRF was designed
to achieve better than 100 dBc/Hz at 30 kHz carrier offset for 2000
tones. At smaller carrier offsets, the dynamic range is expected to
degrade due to the noise profile of the LO used to upmix the synthe-
sized tones. The dynamic range of the SMuRF system is considered
through the full tone synthesis and analysis chain, which includes
the ADCs, DACs, and the polyphase filter banks. In Fig. 18, we show
2000 tones generated over 4–8 GHz by a SMuRF system and the
dynamic range of one of those tones measured directly using a sig-
nal analyzer connected to the SMuRF RF output with no additional
amplification or attenuation beyond a short length of coaxial cable.
Note that measurements do not include the effects of the down-
mix, ADCs, or analysis polyphase filter bank, which combined can
both improve and degrade the achieved end-to-end RF dynamic
range.
To check the impact of the entire digital processing chain,
we acquire a 0.5 s timestream of the digitized I and Q orthogonal
data components from a single channel with a low-band AMC con-
nected in loopback, i.e., with a short coaxial cable connecting its
RF input to its RF output. Since the noise performance of a sin-
gle channel is limited by firmware rather than hardware choices,
one AMC suffices to demonstrate performance without the need
for a second AMC. The tone power is set to −33 dBm output from
the DAC, with an additional 6 dB of programmable RF attenuation
added to each the RF input and output on the AMC, as is typi-
cally used for NIST CMB-style resonators. The digital I/Q data are
acquired without additional processing, corresponding to the state
of the data at the output of the analysis filter bank as described in
Sec. VI A. We take the power spectral density of the time-ordered
data and convert to units of dBc/Hz via normalizing by the magni-
tude of the time-ordered data stream. This is given in the left panel
of Fig. 19.
The 1/f performance of a single channel is due to 1/f noise in
the hardware components, particularly in the LO generation and RF
mixers, which have an fknee ∼100 Hz. For μmux, this performance is
irrelevant due to the flux ramp modulation scheme: we focus instead
on the noise at the carrier offset, where the sidebands due to flux
ramp modulation are sampled. Thus, we repeat the measurement
FIG. 18. (Left) 2000 fixed tones generated with SMuRF over 4–8 GHz (with 250 tones in each 500 MHz band) measured directly using a signal analyzer. LOs that fall within
the frequency range of the plot are labeled with smaller brown markers. The average tone power in each 500 MHz band has been leveled using the programmable output
attenuators. (Right) Zoom in of a single tone while playing 2000 fixed tones, indicated by a larger orange marker on the left-hand plot. The arrow indicates the measured RF
dynamic range at a 30 kHz carrier offset. The signal analyzer trace has been median filtered (while preserving the maximum) to suppress narrow-band spurs. The dynamic
range at 30 kHz carrier offset exceeds the SMuRF requirement of > 100 dBc/Hz after accounting for the signal analyzer noise floor (which is only ∼6 dB lower) and noise
that cancels when the RF signals are downmixed with their common LO.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-23
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 19. (Left) The noise spectral density of a single channel looped back directly from RF out to RF in with only that channel on. The traces represent orthogonal data
components I and Q, which should be identical given there is no resonator in the measurement. We expect the 1/ f knee to be at several hundred Hz due to the LO generation
and RF mixers. The white noise level is below −100 dBc/Hz, as expected, with a roll-off at 1.2 MHz defined by the Nyquist rate of the polyphase filter bank. Narrow-band
spikes are due to a combination of hardware and firmware DSP effects, but do not contribute substantially to the total noise power. (Right) The same measurement as the
left, but with 2000 tones turned on from 4 to 8 GHz. The minimal degradation in noise performance demonstrates the excellent linearity of the full SMuRF system.
shown in Fig. 19 while sweeping the generated tone across the entire
frequency band and extract the noise level at 30 kHz offset, a typical
flux ramp Φ 0 rate. This is given in the left panel of Fig. 20. For appli-
cations requiring better 1 /f stability in RF performance, upgraded
hardware components have been identified and may be swapped in
easily.
We see that the noise floor is well below the requirement
of −100dBc/Hz across the entire frequency range. The noise rises
slightly at the band edges, as is expected given the finite roll-off of
the cavity filters on the AMC RF daughter cards.
A key design consideration for SMuRF is its ability to read out
a large number of channels for cryogenic multiplexing applications.
We trade off single channel noise performance for linearity across
a large number of channels. We therefore require that the noise
performance achieved in one channel is scalable to 2000 channels,
corresponding to the expected multiplexing density for NIST CMB-
style μmux resonators. In the right panel Fig. 19, we show the noise
spectral density of a single channel in loopback while 2000 channels
at−33 dBm each are turned on from 4 to 8 GHz across two AMCs,
which are chained in a configuration consistent with operating a full
FIG. 20. (Left) The noise at 30 kHz carrier offset of a single channel in loopback across the entire 4–8 GHz frequency range. We see that the overall level remains below
−100 dBc/Hz aside from a handful of outliers. The edges of each 500 MHz band are visible due to the slight roll-off in the edges of the passband of the cavity filters. A small
overall tilt is expected due to the degradation of RF performance at higher frequencies for these broadband components. (Right) The same measurement taken while 2000
tones are turned on across 4–8 GHz, with 250 randomly chosen frequencies chosen in each 500 MHz band. We see that the overall level and shape are nearly identical to
that of the single-channel case.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-24
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
4–8 GHz resonator set on a single coaxial line within the cryostat.
This corresponds to the maximum expected channel density of a full
operating SMuRF system, limited by the density of cryogenic chan-
nels. We see that the noise performance suffers minimal penalty as
compared to the single channel case shown in the left side of the
figure.
Similarly, with 2000 channels turned on from 4 to 8 GHz on
two AMCs, we take the noise on each channel serially and extract the
noise level at 30 kHz offset. This is shown in the right panel of Fig. 20,
with the single channel case for comparison given on the left panel.
For more explicit comparison, in Fig. 21, we plot the histogram of
the counts in each side of Fig. 20.
B. White and low frequency noise performance
Reading out newer, optimized (v3.2 or later) NIST CMB-style
resonators not connected to TESs in dark cryostats with basic mag-
netic shielding (e.g., only a room-temperature mumetal can around
the cold multiplexer volume), μmux-coupled SMuRF systems rou-
tinely achieve white noise levels of O(40 pA/
√
Hz) TES current
noise-equivalent with an∼1/f -like spectrum with 1/f knees of O(10
mHz) while multiplexing O(1000) channels. 19,62 For ground-based
CMB receivers instrumented with O(10 m Ω ) normal resistance
TESs this level of readout noise is expected to increase the total
per-detector noise-equivalent power, which is dominated by fluctua-
tions in the observed photon intensity, by only an additional 1%–2%.
While a full analysis of the different noise contributions is deferred
to a future publication, typical measured white noise levels measured
at a O(30 kHz) Φ 0 modulation rate are dominated by resonator
TLS noise, with a subdominant contribution from SMuRF’s finite
RF dynamic range.
Confirming the TES and flux ramp drives achieve their low
50 pA/
√
Hz output current noise specification (see Sec. III B 1) is
difficult using conventional benchtop instrumentation due to the
required sensitivity. From integrated system measurements, the esti-
mated white noise contributions from the TES and flux ramp drives
are consistent with meeting or exceeding their output current noise
specification. At low frequencies, characterizing the noise perfor-
mance of the TES and flux ramp drives is further complicated by
additional noise sources, including variations in passive component
temperatures, microphonics, and RF phase drift. A method for mon-
itoring the overall phase drift of the RF line for slow changes to
enable feedback on tuning parameters or offline data cleaning has
further been developed.63
C. Amplifier linearity and tone tracking
As detailed in Sec. III B 2, microwave resonator systems are
often limited by the linearity of both warm and cryogenic RF compo-
nents. We see in Sec. VIII A that the SMuRF RF components achieve
the requisite linearity: the warm system in loopback suffers mini-
mal degradation when 2000 channels are operated simultaneously.
The linearity of the full RF chain is therefore typically limited by
the achievable linearity of the cryogenic amplifier and other cold RF
components. As described in Sec. VI C, SMuRF addresses this lin-
earity problem by implementing a closed loop feedback algorithm
to maintain the probe tone on the point of minimum amplitude
transmission S min
21 .
We show that this tone tracking system succeeds in reduc-
ing the power at the 4K cryogenic amplifier in a measured system
in Fig. 22. A NIST μmux100k v3.2 resonator was calibrated using
pysmurf software tools. A directional coupler split the output of
the cryostat between the SMuRF RF input on the strongly cou-
pled port and a spectrum analyzer on the weakly coupled port. The
power at the input of the cryogenic LNA chain was computed by
taking the integrated power in a 100 Hz window around the probe
FIG. 21. Noise at 30 kHz offset of each
channel in loopback with 1 or 2000 chan-
nels turned on using identical attenua-
tion and amplification settings. The 2000
channel data were taken with 1000 chan-
nels each from a low band and high band
AMC connected serially in loopback. We
see that there is a modest penalty from
turning on 2000 channels across the
4 GHz bandwidth, but the overall dis-
tribution falls within the −100 dBc/Hz
specification from the initial requirement.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-25
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 22. The power incident on the first-
stage cryogenic amplifier with and with-
out tone tracking for a single tone tuned
to a NIST CMB-style μmux resonator.
We see that the average power incident
on the amplifier is reduced by about 5
dB for a single tone due to tone tracking,
and by more than 10 dB for some bias
points, significantly reducing the linearity
requirement for the cryogenic amplifier
performance.
tone frequency as measured by the spectrum analyzer and adjust-
ing appropriately for the amplifier gains and coupler loss. When
tracking is off, the probe tone is stationary and the total power at
the 4K LNA input varies by over 10 dBm. After tracking is enabled,
the probe tone moves with the resonance, and the power incident
on the cryogenic amplifier is minimized and constant. Since the sys-
tem linearity scales exponentially with the power incident on the RF
amplifiers, this allows for substantial relaxation on the requirements
for the linearity of the hardware components.
This minimization of tone power on the cryogenic amplifier is
critical to reducing intermodulation products in band, which may
contribute to crosstalk or noise. We demonstrate the improvement
of the overall noise floor due to reduced intermodulation products
in Fig. 23. Here, a single NIST CMB-style μmux100k v3.2 resonator
chip with 65 SQUID-coupled resonators spanning 4.25–4.5 GHz is
calibrated with SMuRF at a tone power roughly corresponding to
−70 dBm per tone at the input of the resonators. After interact-
ing with the resonators, the tones are amplified with a 4K HEMT
(Low Now Factory LNF-LNC4-8C-LG), a 50K follow-on amplifier
(B&Z Technologies BZUCR-04000800-031012-102323), and room-
temperature amplifier (MiniCircuits ZX60-83LN12 +) and input
to a spectrum analyzer. After feedback is disabled, no additional
FIG. 23. Spectrum analyzer trace of
the probe tone comb interacting with a
single NIST CMB-style μmux resonator
chip containing 65 SQUID-coupled res-
onators. Probe tones approximately
equivalent to −70 dBm per tone at the
input of the resonators are calibrated to
the resonators. The spectrum analyzer
was placed at the equivalent of the RF
input to SMuRF, after probe tones inter-
act with the resonators and are ampli-
fied by 4K, 50K, and room temperature
amplifiers. No additional flux is applied;
thus, any change in resonance frequen-
cies is due to noise only. We see that
when feedback is disabled, the effective
noise floor rises by about 3 dB.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-26
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
external flux is applied to the SQUID. The measurement was limited
by availability of cold multiplexer chips at the time it was performed;
however, we see that even with a small subset of the full O(1000)
tones used in typical operation, the overall noise floor due to the
additional intermodulation products when feedback is disabled is
elevated by ∼3 dBm, thus degrading the RF dynamic range. This
degradation is prohibitive for μmux at full multiplexing density;
thus, the tone-tracking capability of SMuRF is key to achieving the
O(1000)× or higher multiplexing factors desired.
D. Bandwidth
The measurements in Secs. VIII A and VIII C indicate that
the SMuRF achieves the synthesis and analysis of tones across the
full 4–8 GHz bandwidth while exceeding the requirement for RF
dynamic range. We focus now on the achievable bandwidth of the
detector readout firmware, including tone tracking and flux ramp
demodulation. However, we can heuristically evaluate the band-
width of the tracking loop independent of flux ramping by turning
on feedback without turning on the flux ramp and acquiring data.
The hardware setup remains the same as in Sec. VIII C, but with
the cryostat RF output returned to SMuRF instead of the spectrum
analyzer. The power spectral densities of the tracked frequency and
frequency error are shown in Fig. 24. We see that the power spec-
tral density of tracked frequency rolls off between 1 and 10 kHz
depending on the gain settings used.
Using the adaptive feedback algorithm with tone tracking,
previous measurements have indicated that the SMuRF is capable
of tracking a flux ramp modulated resonance to flux ramp rates
approaching 100 kHz on NIST CMB-style μmux resonators, well in
excess of requirements for CMB polarimetry measurements. 46 We
show explicitly in Fig. 25 that a 1 kHz sine wave injected on the
detector bias line is resolved through the full tone tracking and flux
ramp demodulation scheme. This measurement was limited by the
ability of RTM slow DACs to play a pre-programmed waveform on
the TES bias line, but is not near the capacity of the system.
E. Crosstalk
Since the polyphase filter bank achieves 100 dBc/Hz SFDR, it
is expected that the crosstalk between channels is dominated by the
hardware components. The linearity measurements from Sec. VIII C
indicate that the impact of additional probe tones being turned on
in other channels does not contribute meaningfully to the measured
characteristics of existing channels.
Previous measurements with SMuRF in a full field deploy-
ment setting, including telescope scanning and streaming to external
DAQ, indicate that the crosstalk between non-pathological cold
multiplexer channels integrated with TESs is at least 30 dB below
the primary detector channel.64
More recent laboratory measurements of the cold multiplexer
only constrain the crosstalk of well-behaved channels to about 1 part
in 10 4, consistent with expectations for the crosstalk of μmux cold
hardware.16 These suggest that the crosstalk of the electronics com-
fortably meets the existing requirements and is dominated by the
cryogenic elements.
F. Altitude
We demonstrate that the SMuRF system is operable in high-
altitude environments despite its computationally intensive digital
signal processing algorithm.
FIG. 24. Power spectral density of
tracked frequency (top) and frequency
error (bottom) for varying gains and no
flux ramp. We see that the tracked fre-
quency rolls off at a few kHz or above
depending on the gain setting. The
frequency error is suppressed at low
frequencies, corresponding to the major-
ity of the power being captured by the
tracked frequency.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-27
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
FIG. 25. (Top) Input signal and flux
ramp demodulated signal played on the
detector bias line while the detector was
superconducting. The raw input signal is
sparsely sampled and scaled and shifted
to account for the transfer function of the
superconducting detector’s bias circuit
and latency. (Bottom) Amplitude spectral
density (ASD) of the input and measured
signals. SMuRF easily generates and
recovers a 1 kHz sine wave, here sam-
pled at a flux ramp frame rate of 30 kHz
with 1 Φ 0 per ramp. The white noise
floor of∼100 pA/
√
Hz is due to Johnson
noise generated by the superconducting
detector’s cold bias resistor.
Due to high FPGA use and the 614.4 MHz maximum FPGA
clock frequency, each SMuRF system (not including peripherals)
consumes roughly 210 W. Out of this 210 W total, a typical SMuRF
system draws 110 W for the SMuRF carrier, 40 W for each AMC,
and 20 W for the RTM. The power consumed by the SMuRF carri-
ers is dominated by the main Xilinx Kintex UltraScale + XCKU15P
FPGA, which can draw as much as 80 W in steady state when reading
out resonators over the full 4 GHz SMuRF bandwidth. The major-
ity of the power drawn by the FPGA is consumed by the FPGA’s
0.85 V internal supplies, which draw more than 50 A that is provided
by an 80 A Intel Enpirion Power Solutions EM2280P01QI regulator
on the SMuRF carrier. At these large current and power draws, the
temperature limits of this regulator and the main FPGA are critical
design considerations, particularly because the SMuRF systems are
air cooled and intended for use at high altitude astronomical sites
where the air pressure can be as much as 50% lower than sea level.
For the regulator, this is compounded by the fact that the regulator
efficiency degrades near its 80 A limit, which can result in thermal
runaway if not carefully controlled for in design. FPGA lifetime is an
additional concern, since expected lifetime can degrade if the FPGA
temperature exceeds the Xilinx temperature specification. The max-
imum regulator operating temperature is 120 ○C.65 Xilinx specifies
that the FPGAs must not exceed a temperature of 100 ○C for a 50 A
input current to ensure a> 10 year lifetime.
Early SMuRF prototypes exceeded these temperature limits in
simulated high altitude conditions. This was addressed in the subse-
quent production systems by modifying the SMuRF FPGA firmware
to significantly decrease resource usage and by making significant
improvements to the FPGA and regulator heatsink designs and
heatsink gluing materials and procedures. To verify performance,
six full SMuRF systems, each consisting of a SMuRF carrier with
two installed AMCs and an RTM, were tested in a 7-slot COM-
TEL ATCA crate along with all required peripherals, including a
Dell R440 server and Xilinx KCU1500 data acquisition PCIe card,
in a low pressure chamber.66 The AMCs were each looped back with
a small length of flexible coaxial cable connecting RF input to out-
put. With the chamber pressure pumped down to the equivalent air
pressure at 17 000 ft (395 Torr) to simulate operating conditions at
a high altitude astronomical site, a test routine was run simulating
the full computational load expected for the read out of the maxi-
mum 3328 channels over the full 4 GHz SMuRF bandwidth for each
of the 6 SMuRF systems simultaneously. The chamber temperature
was ramped from −5 to +25○C and then back down to −5○C on
a 3-hour cadence 120 times over the course of 14 days, simulating
the typical diurnal temperature swing expected at a typical high alti-
tude astronomical site based on environmental data from the high
Andes. No subsystem (including peripherals) failures were observed
over this 14 day run, and the SMuRF subsystem temperatures and
currents were logged while ramping the chamber temperature. At
20○C ambient temperature, the averaged logged temperature for the
SMuRF carrier FPGAs and regulators during this test was 71 and
67○C, respectively, and the average regulator current at 20 ○C was
57 A. The measured regulator temperatures are well below their
120○C operating limit, and the FPGA currents and temperatures
meet Xilinx’s 10 year lifetime specification modified to account for
these lower FPGA temperatures. 67 The system was also successfully
cold booted at −5○C three times, simulating remote recovery in
winter conditions.
IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE OUTLOOK
We have developed a digital readout and control system for
use with large-scale microwave resonator-based arrays. The SMuRF
electronics achieve > 100 dBc/Hz dynamic range at 30 kHz offset
for 2000 simultaneous channels across its full 4–8 GHz band-
width, with capacity to read out up to 3328 channels across its
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-28
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
readout bandwidth. Each channel may return data with band-
width up to 2.4 MHz and with a variety of processing options
up to reporting flux ramp demodulated timestreams. Compared to
other microwave resonator readout systems, SMuRF is unique in
its implementation of a tone-tracking algorithm, which allows for
dramatically increasing the channel count without exceeding the
linearity requirements of RF elements, such as cryogenic ampli-
fiers. The system has been designed for integration with other
data acquisition and experimental control platforms, and has been
successfully integrated with control suites for the BICEP/Keck
and Simons Observatory CMB experiments. It has been fielded
previously within the BICEP/Keck program and is baselined for
use on the upcoming Simons Observatory and BICEP Array
experiments.
Current efforts are under way to reconfigure the existing
SMuRF firmware and hardware architectures for KID systems by
removing hardware and firmware functionality required only for
μmux readout. It is estimated that for resonators fabricated with suf-
ficient frequency accuracy, a single SMuRF card has the resources to
support 20 000 KID-type resonators. This would allow for megapixel
arrays to be read out with a single rack of equipment.
Future SMuRF development efforts include development of on-
board pulse processing algorithms for high-bandwidth applications,
improving the resonator tracking calibration scheme for asymmet-
ric resonances, and porting the existing software and firmware
architecture to newly available “RF system on a chip” (RFSoC)
systems. RFSoC systems allow for a large simplification in RF
hardware design, compact profile, and lower power consumption,
making them particularly attractive for balloon- and space-based
missions. Preliminary results on a Xilinx ZCU111 evaluation board
demonstrated comparable noise performance on 237 tracked chan-
nels, with the measurement limited by the availability of cold
resonators at the time. 68 In addition to reproducing the existing
SMuRF firmware and performance on the RFSoC, a number of
improvements using the RFSoC platform are being pursued. We
have developed new approaches to calibrating and improving the
linearity of baseband I/Q modulation and demodulation schemes
that provide the performance required for μmux without requir-
ing the large band-splitting cavity filters present on the current
AMCs. This technique has been successfully demonstrated with test
code on RFSoC hardware and currently is being fully built out and
tested.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
C.Y. was supported, in part, by the National Science Foun-
dation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No.
1656518. M.S.-F. was supported, in part, by the Department
of Energy (DOE) Office of Science Graduate Student Research
(SCGSR) Program. The SCGSR program is administered by the Oak
Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE) for the DOE,
which is managed by ORAU under Contract No. DE-SC0014664.
Z.A. was supported, in part, by the DOE Office of Science Early
Career Research Program. Several figures in this paper were gener-
ated with numpy and matplotlib.69,70 This work was supported by
the Department of Energy at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
under Contract No. DE-AC02-76SF00515.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conflicts to disclose.
Author Contributions
Cyndia Yu: Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Inves-
tigation (equal); Methodology (supporting); Software (support-
ing); Validation (equal); Visualization (lead); Writing – original
draft (lead); Writing – review & editing (equal). Zeeshan Ahmed:
Conceptualization (equal); Funding acquisition (lead); Project
administration (lead); Resources (lead); Supervision (lead); Writ-
ing – review & editing (equal). Josef C. Frisch : Conceptualization
(equal); Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Methodology
(lead); Project administration (lead); Software (supporting); Super-
vision (equal); Writing – original draft (supporting); Writing –
review & editing (equal). Shawn W. Henderson: Conceptualization
(supporting); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Inves-
tigation (equal); Methodology (equal); Project administration (sup-
porting); Software (equal); Supervision (equal); Validation (lead);
Visualization (supporting); Writing – original draft (supporting);
Writing – review & editing (equal). Max Silva-Feaver: Formal anal-
ysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Methodology (supporting); Soft-
ware (supporting); Validation (equal); Visualization (supporting);
Writing – original draft (supporting); Writing – review & edit-
ing (equal). Kam Arnold: Supervision (supporting). David Brown:
Resources (supporting). Jake Connors: Resources (supporting). Ari
J. Cukierman: Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Soft-
ware (supporting); Validation (equal); Writing – review & editing
(supporting). J. Mitch D’Ewart: Formal analysis (equal); Investiga-
tion (equal); Methodology (supporting); Software (lead); Validation
(equal); Visualization (supporting). Bradley J. Dober : Resources
(supporting). John E. Dusatko : Resources (supporting). Gunther
Haller: Funding acquisition (supporting); Project administration
(supporting). Ryan Herbst : Funding acquisition (supporting);
Project administration (supporting); Software (lead); Supervision
(supporting). Gene C. Hilton : Resources (supporting). Johannes
Hubmayr: Resources (supporting); Supervision (supporting). Kent
D. Irwin: Conceptualization (equal); Resources (supporting); Super-
vision (supporting). Chao-Lin Kuo: Resources (supporting); Super-
vision (supporting). John A. B. Mates : Resources (supporting).
Larry Ruckman : Investigation (equal); Software (equal); Supervi-
sion (supporting). Joel Ullom: Resources (supporting). Leila Vale:
Resources (supporting). Daniel D. Van Winkle : Formal analy-
sis (equal); Investigation (equal); Validation (equal); Visualization
(supporting). Jesus Vasquez : Data curation (equal); Investigation
(equal); Software (equal); Validation (equal). Edward Young: Data
curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal);
Software (equal); Validation (equal); Writing – review & editing
(supporting).
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-29
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
REFERENCES
1Cryogenic Particle Detection, edited by C. Enss (Springer, 2005).
2K. D. Irwin and G. C. Hilton, “Transition-edge sensors,” in Cryogenic Particle
Detection, edited by C. Enss (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005), pp. 63–150.
3J. Zmuidzinas, “Superconducting microresonators: Physics and applications,”
Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 3, 169–214 (2012).
4J. A. B. Mates, D. T. Becker, D. A. Bennett, B. J. Dober, J. D. Gard, J. P.
Hays-Wehle, J. W. Fowler, G. C. Hilton, C. D. Reintsema, D. R. Schmidt,
D. S. Swetz, L. R. Vale, and J. N. Ullom, “Simultaneous readout of 128
X-ray and gamma-ray transition-edge microcalorimeters using microwave
SQUID multiplexing,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 062601 (2017).
5S.-J. Lee, C. J. Titus, R. Alonso Mori, M. L. Baker, D. A. Bennett, H.-M. Cho,
W. B. Doriese, J. W. Fowler, K. J. Gaffney, A. Gallo, J. D. Gard, G. C. Hilton,
H. Jang, Y. I. Joe, C. J. Kenney, J. Knight, T. Kroll, J.-S. Lee, D. Li, D. Lu, R.
Marks, M. P. Minitti, K. M. Morgan, H. Ogasawara, G. C. O’Neil, C. D. Reintsema,
D. R. Schmidt, D. Sokaras, J. N. Ullom, T.-C. Weng, C. Williams, B. A. Young,
D. S. Swetz, K. D. Irwin, and D. Nordlund, “Soft X-ray spectroscopy with
transition-edge sensors at stanford synchrotron radiation lightsource beamline
10-1,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 90, 113101 (2019).
6I. Esmaeil Zadeh, J. Chang, J. W. N. Los, S. Gyger, A. W. Elshaari, S.
Steinhauer, S. N. Dorenbos, and V. Zwiller, “Superconducting nanowire single-
photon detectors: A perspective on evolution, state-of-the-art, future develop-
ments, and applications,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 190502 (2021).
7M. Mariantoni, H. Wang, T. Yamamoto, M. Neeley, R. C. Bialczak, Y. Chen, M.
Lenander, E. Lucero, A. D. O’Connell, D. Sank, M. Weides, J. Wenner, Y. Yin,
J. Zhao, A. N. Korotkov, A. N. Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, “Implementing the
quantum von Neumann architecture with superconducting circuits,” Science334,
61–65 (2011).
8J. A. Sobrin, A. J. Anderson, A. N. Bender, B. A. Benson, D. Dutcher, A. Foster,
N. Goeckner-Wald, J. Montgomery, A. Nadolski, A. Rahlin, P. A. R. Ade, Z.
Ahmed, E. Anderes, M. Archipley, J. E. Austermann, J. S. Avva, K. Aylor, L.
Balkenhol, P. S. Barry, R. Basu Thakur, K. Benabed, F. Bianchini, L. E. Bleem,
F. R. Bouchet, L. Bryant, K. Byrum, J. E. Carlstrom, F. W. Carter, T. W. Cecil,
C. L. Chang, P. Chaubal, G. Chen, H. M. Cho, T. L. Chou, J. F. Cliche, T. M.
Crawford, A. Cukierman, C. Daley, T. de Haan, E. V. Denison, K. Dibert, J. Ding,
M. A. Dobbs, W. Everett, C. Feng, K. R. Ferguson, J. Fu, S. Galli, A. E. Gambrel,
R. W. Gardner, R. Gualtieri, S. Guns, N. Gupta, R. Guyser, N. W. Halverson,
A. H. Harke-Hosemann, N. L. Harrington, J. W. Henning, G. C. Hilton, E. Hivon,
G. P. Holder, W. L. Holzapfel, J. C. Hood, D. Howe, N. Huang, K. D. Irwin, O. B.
Jeong, M. Jonas, A. Jones, T. S. Khaire, L. Knox, A. M. Kofman, M. Korman,
D. L. Kubik, S. Kuhlmann, C. L. Kuo, A. T. Lee, E. M. Leitch, A. E. Lowitz, C. Lu,
S. S. Meyer, D. Michalik, M. Millea, T. Natoli, H. Nguyen, G. I. Noble, V. Novosad,
Y. Omori, S. Padin, Z. Pan, P. Paschos, J. Pearson, C. M. Posada, K. Prabhu, W.
Quan, C. L. Reichardt, D. Riebel, B. Riedel, M. Rouble, J. E. Ruhl, B. Saliwanchik,
J. T. Sayre, E. Schiappucci, E. Shirokoff, G. Smecher, A. A. Stark, J. Stephen, K. T.
Story, A. Suzuki, C. Tandoi, K. L. Thompson, B. Thorne, C. Tucker, C. Umilta,
L. R. Vale, K. Vanderlinde, J. D. Vieira, G. Wang, N. Whitehorn, W. L. K. Wu,
V. Yefremenko, K. W. Yoon, and M. R. Young, “The design and integrated per-
formance of SPT-3G,” Astrophys. J., Suppl. Ser. 258, 42 (2021); arXiv:2106.11202
[astro-ph.IM].
9J. A. Chervenak, K. D. Irwin, E. N. Grossman, J. M. Martinis, C. D. Reintsema,
and M. E. Huber, “Performance of multiplexed SQUID readout for cryogenic
sensor arrays,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 4043 (1999).
10M. Dobbs, M. Halpern, K. Irwin, A. Lee, J. Mates, and B. Mazin, “Multiplexed
readout of CMB polarimeters,” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 155, 012004 (2009).
11K. D. Irwin, M. D. Niemack, J. Beyer, H. M. Cho, W. B. Doriese, G. C. Hilton,
C. D. Reintsema, D. R. Schmidt, J. N. Ullom, and L. R. Vale, “Code-division
multiplexing of superconducting transition-edge sensor arrays,” Suprcond. Sci.
Technol. 23, 034004 (2010).
12K. M. Morgan, B. K. Alpert, D. A. Bennett, E. V. Denison, W. B. Doriese,
J. W. Fowler, J. D. Gard, G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin, Y. I. Joe, G. C. O’Neil,
C. D. Reintsema, D. R. Schmidt, J. N. Ullom, and D. S. Swetz, “Code-division-
multiplexed readout of large arrays of TES microcalorimeters,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
109, 112604 (2016).
13P. K. Day, H. G. LeDuc, B. A. Mazin, A. Vayonakis, and J. Zmuidzinas, “A
broadband superconducting detector suitable for use in large arrays,” Nature425,
817–821 (2003).
14K. D. Irwin and K. W. Lehnert, “The microwave SQUID multiplexer,” Appl.
Phys. Lett. 85, 2107 (2004).
15J. A. B. Mates, G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin, L. R. Vale, and K. W. Lehnert,
“Demonstration of a multiplexer of dissipationless superconducting quantum
interference devices,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 023514 (2008).
16B. Dober, Z. Ahmed, K. Arnold, D. T. Becker, D. A. Bennett, J. A. Connors,
A. Cukierman, J. M. D’Ewart, S. M. Duff, J. E. Dusatko, J. C. Frisch, J. D. Gard,
S. W. Henderson, R. Herbst, G. C. Hilton, J. Hubmayr, Y. Li, J. A. B. Mates, H.
McCarrick, C. D. Reintsema, M. Silva-Feaver, L. Ruckman, J. N. Ullom, L. R.
Vale, D. D. Van Winkle, J. Vasquez, Y. Wang, E. Young, C. Yu, and K. Zheng,
“A microwave SQUID multiplexer optimized for bolometric applications,” Appl.
Phys. Lett. 118, 062601 (2021).
17S. Shu, M. Calvo, J. Goupy, S. Leclercq, A. Catalano, A. Bideaud, A. Monfardini,
and E. F. C. Driessen, “Increased multiplexing of superconducting microresonator
arrays by post-characterization adaptation of the on-chip capacitors,” Appl. Phys.
Lett. 113, 082603 (2018).
18C. M. McKenney, J. E. Austermann, J. A. Beall, B. J. Dober, S. M. Duff, J. Gao,
G. C. Hilton, J. Hubmayr, D. Li, J. N. Ullom, J. L. Van Lanen, and M. R. Vissers,
“Tile-and-trim micro-resonator array fabrication optimized for high multiplexing
factors,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 90, 023908 (2019).
19S. W. Henderson, Z. Ahmed, J. Austermann, D. Becker, D. A. Bennett,
D. Brown, S. Chaudhuri, H.-M. S. Cho, J. M. D’Ewart, B. Dober, S. M. Duff,
J. E. Dusatko, S. Fatigoni, J. C. Frisch, J. D. Gard, M. Halpern, G. C. Hilton, J.
Hubmayr, K. D. Irwin, E. D. Karpel, S. S. Kernasovskiy, S. E. Kuenstner, C.-L. Kuo,
D. Li, J. A. B. Mates, C. D. Reintsema, S. R. Smith, J. Ullom, L. R. Vale, D. D. V.
Winkle, M. Vissers, and C. Yu, “Highly-multiplexed microwave SQUID readout
using the SLAC Microresonator Radio Frequency (SMuRF) electronics for future
CMB and sub-millimeter surveys,” Proc. SPIE 10708, 1070819 (2018).
20A. Cukierman, Z. Ahmed, S. Henderson, E. Young, C. Yu, D. Barkats, D. Brown,
S. Chaudhuri, J. Cornelison, J. M. D’Ewart, M. Dierickx, B. J. Dober, J. Dusatko,
S. Fatigoni, J. P. Filippini, J. C. Frisch, G. Haller, M. Halpern, G. C. Hilton, J.
Hubmayr, K. D. Irwin, K. S. Karkare, E. Karpel, S. A. Kernasovskiy, J. M. Kovac, A.
Kovacs, S. E. Kuenstner, C. L. Kuo, D. Li, J. A. B. Mates, S. Smith, T. St. Germaine,
J. N. Ullom, L. R. Vale, D. D. Van Winkle, J. Vasquez, J. Willmert, L. Zeng, P. A. R.
Ade, M. Amiri, R. Basu Thakur, C. A. Bischoff, J. J. Bock, H. Boenish, E. Bullock,
V. Buza, J. Cheshire, J. Connors, M. Crumrine, L. Duband, G. Hall, S. Harrison, S.
R. Hildebrandt, H. Hui, J. Kang, S. Kefeli, K. Lau, K. G. Megerian, L. Moncelsi, T.
Namikawa, H. T. Nguyen, R. O’Brient, S. Palladino, C. Pryke, B. Racine, C. D.
Reintsema, S. Richter, A. Schillaci, R. Schwarz, C. D. Sheehy, A. Soliman, B.
Steinbach, R. V. Sudiwala, K. L. Thompson, C. Tucker, A. D. Turner, C. Umiltà,
A. G. Vieregg, A. Wandui, A. C. Weber, D. V. Wiebe, W. L. K. Wu, H. Yang, K. W.
Yoon, and C. Zhang, “Microwave multiplexing on the Keck Array,” J. Low Temp.
Phys. 199, 858–866 (2020).
21H. McCarrick, E. Healy, Z. Ahmed, K. Arnold, Z. Atkins, J. E. Austermann,
T. Bhandarkar, J. A. Beall, S. M. Bruno, S. K. Choi, J. Connors, N. F. Cothard,
K. D. Crowley, S. Dicker, B. Dober, C. J. Duell, S. M. Duff, D. Dutcher, J. C. Frisch,
N. Galitzki, M. B. Gralla, J. E. Gudmundsson, S. W. Henderson, G. C. Hilton,
S.-P. P. Ho, Z. B. Huber, J. Hubmayr, J. Iuliano, B. R. Johnson, A. M. Kofman,
A. Kusaka, J. Lashner, A. T. Lee, Y. Li, M. J. Link, T. J. Lucas, M. Lungu,
J. A. B. Mates, J. J. McMahon, M. D. Niemack, J. Orlowski-Scherer, J. Seibert,
M. Silva-Feaver, S. M. Simon, S. Staggs, A. Suzuki, T. Terasaki, R. Thornton,
J. N. Ullom, E. M. Vavagiakis, L. R. Vale, J. Van Lanen, M. R. Vissers, Y. Wang,
E. J. Wollack, Z. Xu, E. Young, C. Yu, K. Zheng, and N. Zhu, “The Simons Obser-
vatory microwave SQUID multiplexing detector module design,” Astrophys. J.
922, 38 (2021).
22N. Galitzki, A. Ali, K. S. Arnold, P. C. Ashton, J. E. Austermann, C. Baccigalupi,
T. Baildon, D. Barron, J. A. Beall, S. Beckman, S. M. M. Bruno, S. Bryan, P. G.
Calisse, G. E. Chesmore, Y. Chinone, S. K. Choi, G. Coppi, K. D. Crowley, K. T.
Crowley, A. Cukierman, M. J. Devlin, S. Dicker, B. Dober, S. M. Duff, J. Dunkley,
G. Fabbian, P. A. Gallardo, M. Gerbino, N. Goeckner-Wald, J. E. Golec, J. E. Gud-
mundsson, E. E. Healy, S. Henderson, C. A. Hill, G. C. Hilton, S.-P. P. Ho, L. A.
Howe, J. Hubmayr, O. Jeong, B. Keating, B. J. Koopman, K. Kiuchi, A. Kusaka, J.
Lashner, A. T. Lee, Y. Li, M. Limon, M. Lungu, F. Matsuda, P. D. Mauskopf, A. J.
May, N. McCallum, J. McMahon, F. Nati, M. D. Niemack, J. L. Orlowski-Scherer,
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-30
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
S. C. Parshley, L. Piccirillo, M. S. Rao, C. Raum, M. Salatino, J. S. Seibert, C. Sierra,
M. Silva-Feaver, S. M. Simon, S. T. Staggs, J. R. Stevens, A. Suzuki, G. Teply, R.
Thornton, C. Tsai, J. N. Ullom, E. M. Vavagiakis, M. R. Vissers, B. Westbrook,
E. J. Wollack, Z. Xu, and N. Zhu, “The Simons Observatory: Instrument overview,”
Proc. SPIE 10708, 1070804 (2018).
23L. Moncelsi, P. A. R. Ade, Z. Ahmed, M. Amiri, D. Barkats, R. B. Thakur, C. A.
Bischoff, J. J. Bock, V. Buza, J. R. Cheshire, J. Connors, J. Cornelison, M. Crumrine,
A. J. Cukierman, E. V. Denison, M. Dierickx, L. Duband, M. Eiben, S. Fatigoni,
J. P. Filippini, N. Goeckner-Wald, D. Goldfinger, J. A. Grayson, P. Grimes, G.
Hall, M. Halpern, S. A. Harrison, S. Henderson, S. R. Hildebrandt, G. C. Hilton, J.
Hubmayr, H. Hui, K. D. Irwin, J. H. Kang, K. S. Karkare, S. Kefeli, J. M. Kovac,
C. L. Kuo, K. Lau, E. M. Leitch, K. G. Megerian, L. Minutolo, Y. Nakato, T.
Namikawa, H. T. Nguyen, R. O’Brient, S. Palladino, N. Precup, T. Prouve, C.
Pryke, B. Racine, C. D. Reintsema, A. Schillaci, B. L. Schmitt, A. Soliman, T. S.
Germaine, B. Steinbach, R. V. Sudiwala, K. L. Thompson, C. Tucker, A. D. Turner,
C. Umiltà, A. G. Vieregg, A. Wandui, A. C. Weber, D. V. Wiebe, J. Willmert,
W. L. K. Wu, E. Yang, K. W. Yoon, E. Young, C. Yu, L. Zeng, C. Zhang,
and S. Zhang, “Receiver development for BICEP Array, a next-generation CMB
polarimeter at the South Pole,” Proc. SPIE 11453, 1145314 (2020).
24T. R. Stevenson, M. A. Balvin, S. R. Bandler, A. M. Devasia, P. C. Nagler, K.
Ryu, S. J. Smith, and W. Yoon, “Magnetic calorimeter option for the Lynx x-ray
microcalorimeter,” Proc. SPIE 5, 021009 (2019).
25Y. Chen, D. Sank, P. O’Malley, T. White, R. Barends, B. Chiaro, J. Kelly,
E. Lucero, M. Mariantoni, A. Megrant, C. Neill, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner,
Y. Yin, A. N. Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, “Multiplexed dispersive readout of
superconducting phase qubits,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 182601 (2012).
26O. Bourrion, A. Bideaud, A. Benoit, A. Cruciani, J. F. Macias-Perez, A.
Monfardini, M. Roesch, L. Swenson, and C. Vescovi, “Electronics and data acqui-
sition demonstrator for a kinetic inductance camera,” J. Instrum.6, P06012 (2011);
arXiv:1102.1314 [astro-ph.IM].
27S. McHugh, B. A. Mazin, B. Serfass, S. Meeker, K. O’Brien, R. Duan, R. Raffanti,
and D. Werthimer, “A readout for large arrays of microwave kinetic inductance
detectors,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83, 044702 (2012); arXiv:1203.5861 [astro-ph.IM].
28S. Gordon, B. Dober, A. Sinclair, S. Rowe, S. Bryan, P. Mauskopf, J.
Austermann, M. Devlin, S. Dicker, J. Gao, G. C. Hilton, J. Hubmayr, G. Jones, J.
Klein, N. P. Lourie, C. McKenney, F. Nati, J. D. Soler, M. Strader, and M. Vissers,
“An open source, FPGA-based LeKID readout for BLAST-TNG: Pre-flight
results,” J. Astron. Instrum. 05, 1641003 (2016); arXiv:1611.05400 [astro-ph.IM].
29J. van Rantwijk, M. Grim, D. van Loon, S. Yates, A. Baryshev, and J.
Baselmans, “Multiplexed readout for 1000-pixel arrays of microwave kinetic
inductance detectors,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 64, 1876–1883
(2016); arXiv:1507.04151 [astro-ph.IM].
30J. D. Gard, D. T. Becker, D. A. Bennett, J. W. Fowler, G. C. Hilton, J. A. B.
Mates, C. D. Reintsema, D. R. Schmidt, D. S. Swetz, and J. N. Ullom, “A scalable
readout for microwave SQUID multiplexing of transition-edge sensors,” J. Low
Temp. Phys. 193, 485–497 (2018).
31N. Fruitwala, P. Strader, G. Cancelo, T. Zmuda, K. Treptow, N. Wilcer, C.
Stoughton, A. B. Walter, N. Zobrist, G. Collura, I. Lipartito, J. I. Bailey, and
B. A. Mazin, “Second generation readout for large format photon counting
microwave kinetic inductance detectors,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 91, 124705 (2020);
arXiv:2011.06685 [astro-ph.IM].
32J. P. Smith, J. I. Bailey, J. Tuthill, L. Stefanazzi, G. Cancelo, K. Treptow, and B. A.
Mazin, “A high-throughput oversampled polyphase filter bank using Vivado HLS
and PYNQ on a RFSoC,” IEEE Open J. Circuits Syst. 2, 241 (2021).
33L. Stefanazzi, K. Treptow, N. Wilcer, C. Stoughton, C. Bradford, S. Uemura, S.
Zorzetti, S. Montella, G. Cancelo, S. Sussman, A. Houck, S. Saxena, H. Arnaldi,
A. Agrawal, H. Zhang, C. Ding, and D. I. Schuster, “The QICK (Quantum Instru-
mentation Control Kit): Readout and control for qubits and detectors,” Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 93, 044709 (2022).
34H. Wang, M. Hofheinz, J. Wenner, M. Ansmann, R. C. Bialczak, M. Lenan-
der, E. Lucero, M. Neeley, A. D. O’Connell, D. Sank, M. Weides, A. N. Cleland,
and J. M. Martinis, “Improving the coherence time of superconducting coplanar
resonators,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 233508 (2009).
35M. Hofheinz, H. Wang, M. Ansmann, R. C. Bialczak, E. Lucero, M. Neeley, A. D.
O’Connell, D. Sank, J. Wenner, J. M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland, “Synthesizing
arbitrary quantum states in a superconducting resonator,” Nature 459, 546–549
(2009).
36H. Wang, S. Singh, C. R. H. McRae, J. C. Bardin, S.-X. Lin, N. Messaoudi,
A. R. Castelli, Y. J. Rosen, E. T. Holland, D. P. Pappas, and J. Y. Mutus, “Cryogenic
single-port calibration for superconducting microwave resonator measurements,”
Quantum Sci. Technol. 6, 035015 (2021).
37J. A. B. Mates, K. D. Irwin, L. R. Vale, G. C. Hilton, J. Gao, and K. W.
Lehnert, “Flux-ramp modulation for SQUID multiplexing,” J. Low Temp. Phys.
167, 707–712 (2012).
38M. Wegner, C. Enss, and S. Kempf, “Analytical model of the readout power
and SQUID hysteresis parameter dependence of the resonator characteristics of
microwave SQUID multiplexers,” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 35, 075011 (2022).
39P. A. R. Ade, Z. Ahmed, M. Amiri, D. Barkats, R. B. Thakur, C. A. Bischoff,
D. Beck, J. J. Bock, H. Boenish, E. Bullock, V. Buza, J. R. Cheshire IV, J.
Cornelison, M. Crumrine, A. Cukierman, E. V. Denison, M. Dierickx, L. Duband,
M. Eiben, S. Fatigoni, J. P. Filippini, S. Fliescher, N. Goeckner-Wald, D. C.
Goldfinger, J. Grayson, P. Grimes, G. Hall, G. Halal, M. Halpern, E. Hand, S.
Harrison, S. Henderson, S. R. Hildebrandt, G. C. Hilton, J. Hubmayr, H. Hui,
K. D. Irwin, J. Kang, K. S. Karkare, E. Karpel, S. Kefeli, S. A. Kernasovskiy, J. M.
Kovac, C. L. Kuo, K. Lau, E. M. Leitch, A. Lennox, K. G. Megerian, L. Minutolo,
L. Moncelsi, Y. Nakato, T. Namikawa, H. T. Nguyen, R. O’Brient, R. W. Ogburn
IV, S. Palladino, T. Prouve, C. Pryke, B. Racine, C. D. Reintsema, S. Richter, A.
Schillaci, R. Schwarz, B. L. Schmitt, C. D. Sheehy, A. Soliman, T. S. Germaine, B.
Steinbach, R. V. Sudiwala, G. P. Teply, K. L. Thompson, J. E. Tolan, C. Tucker,
A. D. Turner, C. Umiltà, C. Vergès, A. G. Vieregg, A. Wandui, A. C. Weber,
D. V. Wiebe, J. Willmert, C. L. Wong, W. L. K. Wu, H. Yang, K. W. Yoon, E.
Young, C. Yu, L. Zeng, C. Zhang, and S. Zhang, “BICEP/Keck XV: The BICEP3
cosmic microwave background polarimeter and the first three-year data set,”
Astrophys. J. 927, 77 (2022); arXiv:2110.00482 [astro-ph.IM].
40BICEP2 Collaboration, Keck Array Collaboration, SPIDER Collaboration: P.
A. R. Ade, R. W. Aikin, M. Amiri, D. Barkats, S. J. Benton, C. A. Bischoff,
J. J. Bock, J. A. Bonetti, J. A. Brevik, I. Buder, E. Bullock, G. Chattopadhyay,
G. Davis, P. K. Day, C. D. Dowell, L. Duband, J. P. Filippini, S. Fliescher, S. R.
Golwala, M. Halpern, M. Hasselfield, S. R. Hildebrandt, G. C. Hilton, V. Hristov,
H. Hui, K. D. Irwin, W. C. Jones, K. S. Karkare, J. P. Kaufman, B. G.
Keating, S. Kefeli, S. A. Kernasovskiy, J. M. Kovac, C. L. Kuo, H. G. LeDuc, E.
M. Leitch, N. Llombart, M. Lueker, P. Mason, K. Megerian, L. Moncelsi, C. B.
Netterfield, H. T. Nguyen, R. O’Brient, R. W. Ogburn IV, A. Orlando, C. Pryke,
A. S. Rahlin, C. D. Reintsema, S. Richter, M. C. Runyan, R. Schwarz, C. D. Sheehy,
Z. K. Staniszewski, R. V. Sudiwala, G. P. Teply, J. E. Tolan, A. Trangsrud, R. S.
Tucker, A. D. Turner, A. G. Vieregg, A. Weber, D. V. Wiebe, P. Wilson, C. L.
Wong, K. W. Yoon, J. Zmuidzinas, and J. Zmuidzinas, “Antenna-coupled TES
bolometers used in BICEP2, Keck Array , and SPIDER,” Astrophys. J. 812, 176
(2015); arXiv:1502.00619 [astro-ph.IM].10.1088/0004-637x/812/2/176
41J. A. B. Mates, “The microwave SQUID multiplexer,” Ph.D. thesis, University of
Colorado at Boulder, 2011, https://www.proquest.com/docview/868186018.
42BICEP2 Collaboration: P. A. R. Ade, R. W. Aikin, D. Barkats, S. J. Benton, C.
A. Bischoff, J. J. Bock, J. A. Brevik, I. Buder, E. Bullock, C. D. Dowell, L. Duband,
J. P. Filippini, S. Fliescher, S. R. Golwala, M. Halpern, M. Hasselfield, S. R. Hilde-
brandt, G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin, K. S. Karkare, J. P. Kaufman, B. G. Keating,
S. A. Kernasovskiy, J. M. Kovac, C. L. Kuo, E. M. Leitch, M. Lueker, C. B. Net-
terfield, H. T. Nguyen, R. O’Brient, R. W. Ogburn IV, A. Orlando, C. Pryke, S.
Richter, R. Schwarz, C. D. Sheehy, Z. K. Staniszewski, R. V. Sudiwala, G. P. Teply,
J. E. Tolan, A. D. Turner, A. G. Vieregg, C. L. Wong, and K. W. Yoon, “BICEP2
III: Instrumental systematics,” Astrophys. J. 814, 110 (2015); arXiv:1502.00608
[astro-ph.IM].
43J. A. B. Mates, D. T. Becker, D. A. Bennett, B. J. Dober, J. D. Gard, G. C.
Hilton, D. S. Swetz, L. R. Vale, and J. N. Ullom, “Crosstalk in microwave SQUID
multiplexers,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 115, 202601 (2019).
44S. W. Henderson, J. R. Stevens, M. Amiri, J. Austermann, J. A. Beall, S.
Chaudhuri, H.-M. Cho, S. K. Choi, N. F. Cothard, K. T. Crowley, S. M. Duff,
C. P. Fitzgerald, P. A. Gallardo, M. Halpern, M. Hasselfield, G. Hilton, S.-P. P.
Ho, J. Hubmayr, K. D. Irwin, B. J. Koopman, D. Li, Y. Li, J. McMahon, F. Nati,
M. Niemack, C. D. Reintsema, M. Salatino, A. Schillaci, B. L. Schmitt, S. M.
Simon, S. T. Staggs, E. M. Vavagiakis, and J. T. Ward, “Readout of two-kilopixel
transition-edge sensor arrays for Advanced ACTPol,” Proc. SPIE 9914, 99141G
(2016).
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-31
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing
Review of
Scientific Instruments ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/rsi
45J. W. Fowler, B. K. Alpert, W. B. Doriese, Y.-I. Joe, G. C. O’Neil, J. N. Ullom, and
D. S. Swetz, “The practice of pulse processing,” J. Low Temp. Phys. 184, 374–381
(2016); arXiv:1511.03950 [physics.ins-det].
46C. Yu, Z. Ahmed, J. A. Connors, J. M. D’Ewart, B. Dober, J. C. Frisch, S. W.
Henderson, G. C. Hilton, J. Hubmayr, S. E. Kuenstner, J. A. B. Mates, M. Silva-
Feaver, J. N. Ullom, L. R. Vale, D. V. Winkle, and E. Young, “Bandwidth and
aliasing in the microwave SQUID multiplexer,” J. Low Temp. Phys. 209, 589
(2021).
47J. C. Frisch, R. Claus, J. M. D’Ewart, G. Haller, R. Herbst, B. Hong, U. Legat,
L. Ma, J. Olsen, B. Reese, L. Ruckman, L. Sapozhnikov, S. Smith, T. Straumann,
D. V. Winkle, J. Vasquez, M. Weaver, E. Williams, C. Xu, and A. Young, “A FPGA
based common platform for LCLS2 beam diagnostics and controls,” in IBIC2016
Proccedings, Geneva, Switzerland, 14 September 2016, http://www.jacow.org, Vol.
9914, pp. 650–653.
48See https://www.picmg.org/openstandards/advancedtca/ for information on the
ATCA specification.
49Xilinx, Inc., “UG1260 KCU1500 board user guide,” https://docs.xilinx.com/v/u/
en-US/ug1260-kcu1500-data-center, 2018, v1.4.
50L. Bottou and O. Bousquet, “The tradeoffs of large scale learning,” inOptimiza-
tion for Machine Learning , edited by S. Sra, S. Nowozin, and S. J. Wright (MIT
Press, Cambridge, 2012), pp. 351–368.
51D. P. Mandic, S. Kanna, and A. G. Constantinides, “On the intrinsic relationship
between the least mean square and Kalman filters [lecture notes],” IEEE Signal
Process. Mag. 32, 117–122 (2015).
52See https://github.com/slaclab/rogue for Rogue sourcecode.
53See https://docs.epics-controls.org/en/latest/guides/EPICS_Intro.html for
EPICS documentation.
54See https://github.com/slaclab/pysmurf for pysmurf source code.
55See https://git-scm.com/ for more information on git.
56See https://www.docker.com/ for more information on Dockers.
57See https://epics-controls.org for more information on EPICS.
58K. Story, E. Leitch, P. Ade, K. A. Aird, J. E. Austermann, J. A. Beall, D. Becker, A.
N. Bender, B. A. Benson, L. E. Bleem, J. Britton, J. E. Carlstrom, C. L. Chang, H. C.
Chiang, H. M. Cho, T. M. Crawford, A. T. Crites, A. Datesman, T. de Haan, M. A.
Dobbs, W. Everett, A. Ewall-Wice, E. M. George, N. W. Halverson, N. Harrington,
J. W. Henning, G. C. Hilton, W. L. Holzapfel, S. Hoover, N. Huang, J. Hubmayr,
K. D. Irwin, M. Karfunkle, R. Keisler, J. Kennedy, A. T. Lee, D. Li, M. Lueker,
D. P. Marrone, J. J. McMahon, J. Mehl, S. S. Meyer, J. Montgomery, T. E. Mon-
troy, J. Nagy, T. Natoli, J. P. Nibarger, M. D. Niemack, V. Novosad, S. Padin, C.
Pryke, C. L. Reichardt, J. E. Ruhl, B. R. Saliwanchik, J. T. Sayre, K. K. Schaffer, E.
Shirokoff, G. Smecher, B. Stalder, C. Tucker, K. Vanderlinde, J. D. Vieira, G.
Wang, R. Williamson, V. Yefremenko, K. W. Yoon, and E. Young, “South Pole
Telescope software systems: Control, monitoring, and data acquisition,” Proc.
SPIE 8451, 84510T (2012); arXiv:1210.4966 [astro-ph.IM].
59B. J. Koopman, J. Lashner, L. J. Saunders, M. Hasselfield, T. Bhandarkar, S.
Bhimani, S. K. Choi, C. J. Duell, N. Galitzki, K. Harrington, A. D. Hincks,
S.-P. P. Ho, L. Newburgh, C. L. Reichardt, J. Seibert, J. Spisak, B. Westbrook,
Z. Xu, and N. Zhu, “The Simons Observatory: Overview of data acquisition,
control, monitoring, and computer infrastructure,” Proc. SPIE 11452, 1145208
(2020).
60See https://github.com/cyndiayu/babysmurf for babysmurf source code and
tutorials.
61C. Yu, Z. Ahmed, J. M. D’Ewart, J. C. Frisch, S. W. Henderson, and M.
Silva-Feaver, “A simulation suite for readout with SMuRF tone-tracking
electronics,” Proc. SPIE 12190, 121900V (2022).
62H. McCarrick, K. Arnold, Z. Atkins, J. Austermann, T. Bhandarkar, S. K. Choi,
C. J. Duell, S. M. Duff, D. Dutcher, N. Galitzk, E. Healy, Z. B. Huber, J. Hubmayr,
B. R. Johnson, M. D. Niemack, J. Seibert, M. Silva-Feaver, R. F. Sonka, S. T. Staggs,
E. M. Vavagiakis, Y. Wang, Z. Xu, K. Zheng, and N. Zhu, “The 90 and 150 GHz
universal focal-plane modules for the Simons Observatory,” J. Low Temp. Phys.
(submitted).
63M. Silva-Feaver, Z. Ahmed, K. Arnold, J. C. Frisch, J. Groh, S. W. Henderson,
J. Vasquez, and C. Yu, “Phase drift monitoring for tone tracking readout of
superconducting microwave resonators,” Proc. SPIE 12190, 121900U (2022).
64C. Yu, Z. Ahmed, A. J. Cukierman, S. W. Henderson, E. Y. Young, H.-M. Cho,
J. M. D’Ewart, D. Barkats, D. Brown, S. Chaudhuri, M. I. Dierickx, B. J. Dober,
J. Dusatko, S. Fatigoni, J. P. Filippini, J. C. Frisch, G. Haller, M. Halpern, G. C.
Hilton, J. Hubmayr, K. D. Irwin, K. S. Karkare, E. Karpel, S. A. S. Kernasovskiy,
J. M. Kovac, S. E. Kuenstner, C.-L. Kuo, D. Li, J. A. B. Mates, S. Smith, M. T. S.
Germaine, J. N. Ullom, L. Vale, D. D. V. Winkle, J. Vasquez, L. Zeng, and
BICEP/Keck Collaborations, “On-sky systematics of the microwave SQUID
multiplexer,” in Low Temperature Detectors Conference, Milan, Italy, 2019.
65See https://www.xilinx.com/products/silicon-devices/fpga/kintex-ultrascale-pl
us.html#documentation for Xilinx Ultrascale+ datasheets.
66See https://www.westpak.com/ for Westpak, Inc. San Jose, CA.
67Xilinx, private communication (August, 2020).
68J. M. D’Ewart, Z. Ahmed, D. Brown, S. Chaudhuri, H.-M. S. Cho, B. Dober,
J. E. Dusatko, S. Fatigoni, J. C. Frisch, M. Halpern, S. W. Henderson, G. C. Hilton,
J. Hubmayr, K. D. Irwin, E. D. Karpel, S. E. Kuenstner, C.-L. Kuo, D. Li, J. A.
B. Mates, S. R. Smith, J. Ullom, L. R. Vale, D. D. V. Winkle, C. Yu, G. Haller,
J. Vasquez, E. Young, A. Cukierman, R. Herbst, and L. Ruckman, “SMuRF readout
electronics for microwave SQUID multiplexing,” in Collaboration for Astronomy
Signal Processing and Electronics Research Community Workshop, Cambridge,
MA, 2019.
69C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D.
Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Taylor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer,
M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. Fernández del Río, M. Wiebe, P.
Peterson, P. Gérard-Marchant, K. Sheppard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi,
C. Gohlke, and T. E. Oliphant, “Array programming with NumPy,” Nature 585,
357–362 (2020).
70J. D. Hunter, “Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment,” Comput. Sci. Eng. 9,
90–95 (2007).
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 014712 (2023); doi: 10.1063/5.0125084 94, 014712-32
Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing